AN INVESTIGATION

 

THE LAWS OF THOUGHT,

 

THE MATHEMATICAL THEORIES OF LOGIC
AND PROBABILITIES.

GEORGE BOOLE LL.D.

LONDON:
WALTON AND MABERLY,

CANRIDGE: MACHILLAY AYD C0.
w51,

 

 
; e eha
AN INVESTIGATION %

THE LAWS OF THOUGHT,

 

THE MATHEMATICAL THEORIES OF LOGIC
AND PROBABILITIES.

GEORGE BOOLE LL.D.

LONDON:
WALTON AND MABERLY,

CANRIDGE: MACMILLY AYD c0.
w51,
™0

JOHN RYALL, LL.D..

VICE-PRESIDENT AND PROFESSOR OF GREEK

IN QUEEN'S COLLEGE, CORK,

THIS WORK IS INSCRIBED

IN TESTIMONY OF FRIENDSHIP AND ESTEEM
  PREFACE.



THE following work is not a republication of a former treatise by the Author,

entitled, "The Mathematical Analysis of Logic." Its earlier portion is indeed

devoted to the same object, and it begins by establishing the same system of

fundamental laws, but its methods are more general, and its range of

applications far wider. It exhibits the results, matured by some years of study

and reflection, of a principle of investigation relating to the intellectual

operations, the previous exposition of which was written within a few weeks

after its idea had been conceived.

That portion of this work which relates to Logic presupposes in its reader a

knowledge of the most important terms of the science, as usually treated, and

of its general object. On these points there is no better guide than Archbishop

Whately's "Elements of Logic," or Mr. Thomson's " Outlines of the Laws of

Thought." To the former of these treatises, the present revival of attention to

this class of studies seems in a great measure due. Some acquaintance with

the principles of Algebra is also requisite, but it is not necessary that this

application should have been carried beyond the solution of simple equations.

For the study of those chapters which relate to the theory of probabilities, a

somewhat larger knowledge of Algebra is required, and especially of the

doctrine of Elimination, and of the solution of Equations containing more

than one unknown quantity. Preliminary information upon the subject-matter

will be found in the special treatises on Probabilities in "Lardner's Cabinet

Cyclopedia," and the "Library of Useful Knowledge," the former of these by

Professor De Morgan, the latter by Sir John Lubbock; and in an interesting

series of Letters translated from the French of M. Quetelet. Other references

will be given in the work. On a first perusal the reader may omit at his

discretion, Chapters X., xiv., and xiX., together with any of the applications

which he may deem uninviting or irrelevant.

In different parts of the work, and especially in the notes to the concluding

chapter, will be found references to various writers, ancient and modern,

chiefly designed to illustrate a certain view of the history of philosophy. With

respect to these, the Author thinks it proper to add, that he has in no instance

given a citation which he has not believed upon careful examination to be

supported either by parallel authorities, or by the general tenor of the workfrom which it was taken. While he would gladly have avoided the

introduction of anything which might by possibility be construed into the

parade of learning, he felt it to be due both to his subject and to the truth, that

the statements in the text should be accompanied by the means of

verification. And if now, in bringing to its close a labour, of the extent of

which few persons will be able to judge from its apparent fruits, he may be

permitted to speak for a single moment of the feelings with which he has

pursued, and with which he now lays aside, his task, he would say, that he

never doubted that it was worthy of his best efforts; that he felt that whatever

of truth it might bring to light was not a private or arbitrary thing, not

dependent, as to its essence, upon any human opinion. He was fully aware

that learned and able men maintained opinions upon the subject of Logic

directly opposed to the views upon which the entire argument and procedure

of his work rested. While he believed those opinions to be erroneous, he was

conscious that his own views might insensibly be warped by an influence of

another kind. He felt in an especial manner the danger of that intellectual bias

which long attention to a particular aspect of truth tends to produce. But he

trusts that out of this conflict of opinions the same truth will but emerge the

more free from any personal admixture; that its different parts will be seen in

their just proportion; and that none of them will eventually be too highly

valued or too lightly regarded because of the prejudices which may attach to

the mere form of its exposition.

To his valued friend, the ReV. George Stephens Dickson, of Lincoln, the

Author desires to record his obligations for much kind assistance in the

revision of this work, and for some important suggestions.



5, GRENVILLE-PLACE, CORK, Nov. 30tf, 1853.CONTENTS.

 

CHAPTER 1

Narome axp DEsiox or Tma Wons,

CHAPTER 1L

StaNs AND THEIR Laws, .

CHAPTER IIL

DrrivaTiox or Tie Laws,

CHAPTER IV.

DivisioN or PRoPosITIONS,

CHAPTER V.

PRINCIPLES 0F SYMBOLIOAL REASONING, -

CHAPTER VI.
O INTERPRETATION,

CHAPTER VIL

Or Ewrsatiox,

CHAPTER VIIL

Or Repuctio,

CHAPTER IX.

METHODS OF ABBREVIATION, -

2

39

52

66

80

9

14

130
iv CONTENTS.

CHAPTER X.
CoxpiTioNs oF A PerrEcr MeTion,

CHAPTER XI.
Or SecoxDARY PROPOSITIONS,

CHAPTER XIT.
MuETHODS 1Y SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS,

|

CHAPTER XIIL.
Cuanz jw Sevoza,

CHAPTER XIV.
ExAMPLE oF ANALYSIS,

CHAPTER XV.

Ov TE AmsTorenax Lootc, .

CHAPTER XVL
Or uz Tazory or PropaniLITIES,

CHAPTER XVIL

GENERAL METHOD IX PROBABILITIES,

CHAPTER XVIIL

FLEMENTARY [LLUSTRATIONS,

CHAPTER XIX.

O StaTisTICAL CoNDITIO!

 

CHAPTER XX.
ProbLExs ON CAUSES, . . . .

CHAPTER XXI.
PrOBABILITY 0¥ JUDGMENTS, .

CHAPTER XXIL

CoxsTrruTiox oF TiE INTELLECT,

150

159

m

219

 

 

23

26

205

320

76

399
AN INVESTIGATION



THE LAWS OF THOUGHT.









 
  CHAPTER I.

  NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK

1. THE design of the following treatise is to investigate the fundamental laws

of those operations of the mind by which reasoning is performed; to give

expression to them in the symbolical language of a Calculus, and upon this

foundation to establish the science of Logic and construct its method; to

make that method itself the basis of a general method for the application of

the mathematical doctrine of Probabilities; and, finally, to collect from the

various elements of truth brought to view in the course of these inquiries

some probable intimations concerning the nature and constitution of the

human mind.

2. That this design is not altogether a novel one it is almost needless to

remark, and it is well known that to its two main practical divisions of Logic

and Probabilities a very considerable share of the attention of philosophers

has been directed. In its ancient and scholastic form, indeed, the subject of

Logic stands almost exclusively associated with the great name of Aristotle.

As it was presented to ancient Greece in the partly technical, partly

metaphysical disquisitions of the Organon, such, with scarcely any essential

change, it has continued to the present day. The stream of original inquiry has

rather been directed towards questions of general philosophy, which, though

they have arisen among the disputes of the logicians, have outgrown their

origin, and given to successive ages of speculation their peculiar bent and

character. The eras of Porphyry and Proclus, of Ansehn and Abelard, of

Ramus, and of Descartes, together with the final protests of Bacon and

Locke, rise up before the mind as examples of the remoter influences of thestudy upon the course of human thought, partly in suggesting topics fertile of

discussion, partly in provoking remonstrance against its own undue

pretensions. The history of the theory of Probabilities, on the other hand, has

presented far more of that character of steady growth which belongs to

science. In its origin the early genius of Pascal,—in its maturer stages of

development the most recondite of all the mathematical speculations of

Laplace,—were directed to its improvement; to omit here the mention of

other names scarcely less distinguished than these. As the study of Logic has

been remarkable for the kindred questions of Metaphysics to which itha8

given occasion, so that of Probabilities also has been remarkable for the

impulse which it has bestowed upon the higher departments of mathematical

science. Each of these subjects has, moreover, been justly regarded as having

relation to a speculative as well as to a practical end. To enable us to deduce

correct inferences from given premises is not the only object of Logic; nor is

it the sole claim of the theory of Probabilities that it teaches us how to

establish the business of life assurance on a secure basis; and how to

condense whatever is valuable in the records of innumerable observations in

astronomy, in physics, or in that field of social inquiry which is fast assuming

a character of great importance. Both these studies have also an interest of

another kind, derived from the light which they shed upon the intellectual

powers. They instruct us concerning the mode in which language and number

serve as instrumental aids to the processes of reasoning; they reveal to us in

some degree the connexion between different powers of our common

intellect; they set before us what, in the two domains of demonstrative and of

probable knowledge, are the essential standards of truth and correctness,—

standards not derived from without, but deeply founded in the constitution of

the human faculties. These ends of speculation yield neither in interest nor in

dignity, nor yet, it may be added, in importance, to the practical objects, with,

the pursuit of which they have been historically associated. To unfold the

secret laws and relations of those high faculties of thought by which all

beyond the merely perceptive knowledge of the world and of ourselves is

attained or matured, is an object which does not stand in need of

commendation to a rational mind.

3. But although certain parts of the design of this work have been

entertained by others, its general conception, its method, and, to a

considerable extent, its results, are believed to be original. For this reason I

shall offer, in the present chapter, some preparatory statements andexplanations, in order that the real aim of this treatise may be understood, and

the treatment of its subject facilitated.

It is designed, in the first place, to investigate the fundamental laws of

those operations of the mind by which reasoning is performed. It is

unnecessary to enter here into any argument to prove that the operations of

the mind are in a certain real sense subject to laws, and that a science of the

mind is therefore possible. If these are questions which admit of doubt, that

doubt is not to be met by an endeavour to settle the point of dispute d priori,

but by directing the attention of the objector to the evidence of actual laws,

by referring him to an actual science. And thus the solution of that doubt

would belong not to the introduction to this treatise, but to the treatise itself.

Let the assumption be granted, that a science of the intellectual powers is

possible, and let us for a moment consider how the knowledge of it is to bo

obtained.

4. Like all other sciences, that of the intellectual operations must primarily

rest upon observation,—the subject of such observation being the very

operations and processes of which we desire to determine the laws. But while

the necessity of a foundation in experience is thus a condition common to all

sciences, there are some special differences between the modes in which this

principle becomes available for the determination of general truths when the

subject of inquiry is the mind, and when the subject is external nature. To

these it is necessary to direct attention.

The general laws of Nature are not, for the most part, immediate objects of

perception. They are either inductive inferences from a large body of facts,

the common truth in which they express, or, in their origin at least, physical

hypotheses of a causal nature serving to explain phenomena with undeviating

precision, and to enable us to predict new combinations of them. They are in

all cases, and in the strictest sense of the term, probable conclusions,

approaching, indeed, ever and ever nearer to certainty, as they receive more

and more of the confirmation of experience. But of the character of

probability, in the strict and proper sense of that term, they are never wholly

divested. On the other hand, the knowledge of the laws of the mind does not

require as its basis any extensive collection of observations. The general truth

is seen in the particular instance, and it is not confirmed by the repetition of

instances. We may illustrate this position by an obvious example. It may be a

question whether that formula of reasoning, which is called the dictum ofAristotle, de omni et tiv.Uo, expresses a primary law of human reasoning or

not; but it is no question that it expresses a general truth in Logic. Now that

truth is made manifest in all its generality by reflection upon a single instance

of its application. And this is both an evidence that the particular principle or

formula in question is founded upon some general law or laws of the mind,

and an illustration of the doctrine that the perception of such general truths is

not derived from an induction from many instances, but is involved in the

clear apprehension of a single instance. In connexion with this truth is seen

the not less important one that our knowledge of the laws upon which the

science of the intellectual powers rests, whatever may be its extent or its

deficiency, is not probable knowledge. For we not only see in the particular

example the general truth, but we see it also as a certain truth,— a truth, our

confidence in which will not continue to increase with increasing experience

of its practical verifications.

5. But if the general truths of Logic are of such a nature that when

presented to the mind they at once command assent, wherein consists the

difficulty of constructing the Science of Logic? Not, it may be answered, in

collecting the materials of knowledge, but in discriminating their nature, and

determining their mutual place and relation. All sciences consist of general

truths, but of those truths some only are primary and fundamental, others are

secondary and derived. The laws of elliptic motion, discovered by Kepler, are

general truths in astronomy, but they are not its fundamental truths. And it is

so also in the purely mathematical sciences. An almost boundless diversity of

theorems, which are known, and an infinite possibility of others, as yet

unknown, rest together upon the foundation of a few simple axioms; and yet

these are all general truths. It may be added, that they are truths which to an

intelligence sufficiently refined would shine forth in their own unborrowed

light, without the need of those connecting links of thought, those steps of

wearisome and often painful deduction, by which the knowledge of them is

actually acquired. Let us define as fundamental those laws and principles

from which all other general truths of science may be deduced, and into

which they may all be again resolved. Shall we then err in regarding that as

the true science of Logic which, laying down certain elementary laws,

confirmed by the very testimony of the mind, permits us thence to deduce, by

uniform processes, the entire chain of its secondary consequences, and

furnishes, for its practical applications, methods of perfect generality? Let it

be considered whether in any science, viewed either as a system of truth or asthe foundation of a practical art, there can properly be any other test of the

completeness and the fundamental character of its laws, than the

completeness of its system of derived truths, and the generality of the

methods which it serves to establish. Other questions may indeed present

themselves. Convenience, prescription, individual preference, may urge their

claims and deserve attention. But as respects the question of what constitutes

science in its abstract integrity, I apprehend that no other considerations than

the above are properly of any value.

6. It is designed, in the next place, to give expression in this treatise to the

fundamental laws of reasoning in the symbolical language of a Calculus.

Upon this head it will suffice to say, that those laws are such as to suggest

this mode of expression, and to give to it a peculiar and exclusive fitness for

the ends in view. There is not only a close analogy between the operations of

the mind in general reasoning and its operations in the particular science of

Algebra, but there is to a considerable extent an exact agreement in the laws

by which the two classes of operations are conducted. Of course the laws

must in both cases be determined independently; any formal agreement

between them can only be established a posteriori by actual comparison. To

borrow the notation of the science of Number, and then assume that in its

new application the laws by which its use is governed will remain unchanged,

would be mere hypothesis. There exist, indeed, certain general principles

founded in the very nature of language, by which the use of symbols, which

are but the elements of scientific language, is determined. To a certain extent

these elements are arbitrary. Their interpretation is purely conventional: we

are permitted to employ them in whatever sense we please. But this

permission is limited by two indispensable conditions,—first, that from the

sense once conventionally established we never, in the same process of

reasoning, depart; secondly, that the laws by which the process is conducted

be founded exclusively upon the above fixed sense or meaning of the

symbols employed. In accordance with these principles, any agreement which

may be established between the laws of the symbols of Logic and those of

Algebra can but issue in an agreement of processes. The two provinces of

interpretation remain apart and independent, each subject to its own laws and

conditions.

Now the actual investigations of the following pages exhibit Logic, in its

practical aspect, as a system of processes carried on by the aid of symbolshaving a definite interpretation, and subject to laws founded upon that

interpretation alone. But at the same time they exhibit those laws as identical

in form with the laws of the general symbols of algebra, with this single

addition, viz., that the symbols of Logic arc further subject to a special law

(Chap. iI.), to which the symbols of quantity, as such, are not subject. Upon

the nature and the evidence of this law it is not purposed here to dwell. These

questions will be fully discussed in a future page. But as constituting the

essential ground of difference between those forms of inference with which

Logic is conversant, and those which present themselves in the particular

science of Number, the law in question is deserving of more than a passing

notice. It may be said that it lies at the very foundation of general reasoning,

—that it governs those intellectual acts of conception or of imagination which

are preliminary to the processes of logical deduction, and that it gives to the

pror cesses themselves much of their actual form and expression. It may

hence be affirmed that this law constitutes the germ or seminal principle, of

which every approximation to a general method in Logic is the more or less

perfect development.

7. The principle has already been laid down (5) that the sufficiency and

truly fundamental character of any assumed system of laws in the science of

Logic must partly be seen in the perfection of the methods to which they

conduct us. It remains, then, to consider what the requirements of a general

method in Logic are, and how far they are fulfilled in the system of the

present work.

  Logic is conversant with two kinds of relations,—relations among things,

and relations among facts. But as facts are expressed by propositions, the

latter species of relation may, at least for the purposes of Logic, be resolved

into a relation among propositions. The assertion that the fact or event A is an

invariable consequent of the fact or event B may, to this extent at least, be

regarded as equivalent to the assertion, that the truth of the proposition

affirming the occurrence of the event B always implies the truth of the

proposition affirming the occurrence of the event A. Instead, then, of saying

that Logic is conversant with relations among things and relations among

facta, we are permitted to say that it is concerned with relations among things

and relations among propositions. Of the former kind of relations we have an

example in the proposition—" All men are mortal;" of the latter kind in the

proposition—" If the sun is totally eclipsed, the stars will become visible."The one expresses a relation between "men" and " mortal beings," the other

between the elementary propositions—" The sun is totally eclipsed;" "The

stars will become visible." Among such relations 1 suppose to be included

those which affirm or deny existence with respect to things, and those which

affirm or deny truth with respect to propositions. Now let those things or

those propositions among which relation is expressed be termed the elements

of the propositions by which such relation is expressed. Proceeding from this

definition, we may then say that the premises of any logical argument express

given relations among certain elements, and that the conclusion must express

an implied relation among those elements, or among a part of them, i. e. a

relation implied by or inferentially involved in the premises.

8. Now this being premised, the requirements of a general method in Logic

seem to be the following:—

1st. As the conclusion must express a relation among the whole or among a

part of the elements involved in the premises, it is requisite that we should

possess the means of eliminating those elements which we desire not to

appear in the conclusion, and of determining the whole amount of relation

implied by the premises among the elements which we wish to retain. Those

elements which do not present themselves in the conclusion are, in the

language of the common Logic, called middle terms; and the species of

elimination exemplified in treatises on Logic consists in deducing from two

propositions, containing a common element or middle term, a conclusion

connecting the two remaining terms. But the problem of elimination, as

contemplated in this work, possesses a much wider scope. It proposes not

merely the elimination of one middle term from two propositions, but the

elimination generally of middle terms from propositions, without regard to

the number of either of them, or to the nature of their connexion. To this

object neither the processes of Logic nor those of Algebra, in their actual

state, present any strict parallel. In the latter science the problem of

elimination is known to be limited in the following manner:—From two

equations we can eliminate one symbol of quantity; from three equations two

symbols; and, generally, from n equations n - 1 symbols. But though this

condition, necessary in Algebra, seems to prevail in the existing Logic also, it

has no essential place in Logic as a science. There, no relation whatever can

be proved to prevail between the number of terms to be eliminated and the

number of propositions from which the elimination is to be effected. Fromthe equation representing a single proposition, any number of symbols

representing terms or elements in Logic may be eliminated; -and from any

number of equations representing propositions, one or any other number of

symbols of this kind may be eliminated in a similar manner. For such

elimination there exists one general process applicable to all cases. This is

one of the many remarkable consequences of that distinguishing law of the

symbols of Logic, to which attention has been already directed.





  2ndly. It should be within the province of a general method in Logic to

express the final relation among the elements of the conclusion by any

admissible kind of proposition, or in any selected order of terms. Among

varieties of kind we may reckon those which logicians have designated by the

terms categorical, hypothetical, disjunctive, &c. To a choice or selection in

the order of the terms, we may refer whatsoever is dependent upon the

appearance of particular elements in the subject or in the predicate, in the

antecedent or in the consequent, of that proposition which forms the "

conclusion." But waiving the language of the schools, let us consider what

really distinct species of problems may present themselves to our notice. We

have seen that the elements of the final or inferred relation may either be

things or propositions. Suppose the former case; then it might be required to

deduce from the premises a definition or description of some one thing, or

class of things, constituting an element of the conclusion in terms of the other

things involved in it. Or we might form the conception of some thing or class

of things, involving more than one of the elements of the conclusion, and

require its expression in terms of the other elements. Again, suppose the

elements retained in the conclusion to be propositions, we might desire to

ascertain such points as the following, viz., Whether, in virtue of the

premises, any of those propositions, taken singly, are true or false ?—

Whether particular combinations of them are true or false ?—Whether,

assuming a particular proposition to be true, any consequences will follow,

and if so, what consequences, with respect to the other propositions ?—

Whether any particular condition being assumed with reference to certain of

the propositions, any consequences, and what consequences, will follow with

respect to the others? and so on. I say that these are general questions, which

it should fall within the scope or province of a general method in Logic tosolve. Perhaps we might include them all under this one statement of the final

problem of practical Logic. Given a set of premises expressing relations

among certain elements, whether things or propositions: required explicitly

the whole relation consequent among any of those elements under any

proposed conditions, and in any proposed form. That this problem, under all

its aspects, is resolvable, will hereafter appear. But it is not for the sake of

noticing this fact, that the above inquiry into the nature and the functions of a

general method in Logic has been introduced. It is necessary that the reader

should apprehend what are the specific ends of the investigation upon which

we are entering, as well as the principles which are to guide us to the

attainment of them.

9. Possibly it may here be said that the Logic of Aristotle, in its rules of

syllogism and conversion, sets forth the elementary processes of which all

reasoning consists, and that beyond these there is neither scope nor occasion

for a general method. I have no desire to point out the defects of the common

Logic, nor do I wish to refer to it any further than is necessary, in order to

place in its true light the nature of the present treatise. With this end alone in

view, I would remark :—1st. That syllogism, conversion, &c., are not the

ultimate processes of Logic. It will be shown in this treatise that they are

founded upon, and are resolvable into, ulterior and more simple processes

which constitute the real elements of method in Logic. Nor is it true in fact

that all inference is reducible to the particular forms of syllogism and

conversion.— Vide Chap. xV. 2ndly. If all inference were reducible to these

two processes (and it has been maintained that it is reducible to syllogism

alone), there would still exist the same necessity for a general method. For it

would still be requisite to determine in what order the processes should

succeed each other, as well as their particular nature, in order that the desired

relation should be obtained. By the desired relation I mean that full relation

which, in virtue of the premises, connects any elements selected out of the

premises at will, and which, moreover, expresses that relation in any desired

form and order. If we may judge from the mathematical sciences, which are

the most perfect examples of method known, this directive function of

Method constitutes its chief office and distinction. The fundamental

processes of arithmetic, for instance, are in themselves but the elements of a

possible science. To assign their nature is the first business of its method, but

to arrange their succession is its subsequent and higher function. In the more

complex examples of logical deduction, and especially in those which form abasis for the solution of difficult questions in the theory of Probabilities, the

aid of a directive method, such as a Calculus alone can supply, is

indispensable.

10. Whence it is that the ultimate laws of Logic are mathematical in their

form; why they are, except in a single point, identical with the general laws of

Number; and why in that particular point they differ;—are questions upon

which it might not be very remote from presumption to endeavour to

pronounce a positive judgment. Probably they lie beyond the reach of our

limited faculties. It may, perhaps, be permitted to the mind to attain a

knowledge of the laws to which it is itself subject, without its being also

given to it to understand their ground and origin, or even, except in a very

limited degree, to comprehend their fitness for their end, as compared with

other and conceivable systems of law. Such knowledge is, indeed,

unnecessary for the ends of science, which properly concerns itself with what

is, and seeks not for grounds of preference or reasons of appointment. These

considerations furnish a sufficient answer to all protests against the exhibition

of Logic in the form of a Calculus. It is not because we choose to assign to it

such a mode of manifestation, but because the ultimate laws of thought

render that mode possible, and prescribe its character, and forbid, as it would

seem, the perfect manifestation of the science in any other form, that such a

mode demands adoption. It is to be remembered that it is the business of

science not to create laws, but to discover them. We do not originate the

constitution of our own minds, greatly as it may be in our power to modify

their character. And as the laws of the human intellect do not depend upon

our will, so the forms of the science, of which they constitute the basis, are in

all essential regards independent of individual choice.

11. Beside the general statement of the principles of the above method, this

treatise will exhibit its application to the analysis of a considerable variety of

propositions, and of trains of propositions constituting the premises of

demonstrative arguments. These examples have been selected from various

writers, they differ greatly in complexity, and they embrace a wide range of

subjects. Though in this particular respect it may appear to some that too

great a latitude of choice has been exercised, I do not deem it necessary to

offer any apology upon this account. That Logic, as a science, is susceptible

of very wide applications is admitted; but it is equally certain that its ultimate

forms and processes are mathematical. Any objection a priori which maytherefore be supposed to lie against the adoption of such forms and processes

in the discussion of a problem of morals or of general philosophy must be

founded upon misapprehension or false analogy. It is not of the essence of

mathematics to be conversant with the ideas of number and quantity.

Whether as a general habit of mind it would be desirable to apply symbolical

processes to moral argument, is another question. Possibly, as 1 have

elsewhere observed,* the perfection of the method of Logic may be chiefly

valuable as an evidence of the speculative truth of its principles. To supersede

the employment of common reasoning, or to subject it to the rigour of

technical forms, would be the last desire of one who knows the value of that

intellectual toil and warfare which imparts to the mind an athletic vigour, and

teaches it to contend with difficulties, and to rely upon itself in emergencies.

Nevertheless, cases may arise in which the value of a scientific procedure,

even in those things which fall confessedly under the ordinary dominion of

the reason, may be felt and acknowledged. Some examples of this kind will

be found in the present work.

12. The general doctrine and method of Logic above explained form also

the basis of a theory and corresponding method of Probabilities. Accordingly,

the development of such a theory and method, upon the above principles, will

constitute a distinct object of the present treatise. Of the nature of this

application it may be desirable to give here some account, more especially as

• Mathematical Analysis of Logic. London: G. Bell. 1847.

regards the character of the solutions to which it leads. In connexion with this

object some further detail will be requisite concerning the forms in which the

results of the logical analysis are presented.

The ground of this necessity of a prior method in Logic, as the basis of a

theory of Probabilities, may be stated in a few words. Before we can

determine the mode in which the expected frequency of occurrence of a

particular event is dependent upon the known frequency of occurrence of any

other events, we must be acquainted with the mutual dependence of the

events themselves. Speaking technically, we must be able to express the

event whose probability is sought, as a function of the events whose

probabilities are given. Now this explicit determination belongs in all

instances to the department of Logic. Probability, however, in its

mathematical acceptation, admits of numerical measurement. Hence thesubject of Probabilities belongs equally to the science of Number and to that

of Logic. In recognising the co-ordinate existence of both these elements, the

present treatise differs from all previous ones; and as this difference not only

affects the question of the possibility of the solution of problems in a large

number of instances, but also introduces new and important elements into the

solutions obtained, I deem it necessary to state here, at some length, the

peculiar consequences of the theory developed in the following pages.

13. The measure of the probability of an event is usually defined as a

fraction, of which the numerator represents the number of cases favourable to

the event, and the denominator the whole number of cases favourable and

unfavourable; all cases being supposed equally likely to happen. That

definition is adopted in the present work. At the same time it is shown that

there is another aspect of the subject (shortly to be referred to) which might

equally be regarded as fundamental, and which would actually lead to the

same system of methods and conclusions. It may be added, that so far as the

received conclusions of the theory of Probabilities extend, and so far as they

are consequences of its fundamental definitions, they do not differ from the

results (supposed to be equally correct in inference) of the method of this

work.

  Again, although questions in the theory of Probabilities present themselves

under various aspects, and may be variously modified by algebraical and

other conditions, there seems to be one general type to which all such

questions, or so much of each of them as truly belongs to the theory of

Probabilities, may be referred. Considered with reference to the data and the

quasitum, that type may be described as follows:—1st. The data are the

probabilities of one or more given events, each probability being either that

of the absolute fulfilment of the event to which it relates, or the probability of

its fulfilment under given supposed conditions. 2ndly. The qucBsitum, or

object sought, is the probability of the fulfilment, absolutely or conditionally,

of some other event differing in expression from those in the data, but more

or less involving the same elements. As concerns the data, they are either

causally given,—as when the probability of a particular throw of a die is

deduced from a knowledge of the constitution of the piece,—or they are

derived from observation of repeated instances of the success or failure of

events. In the latter case the probability of an event may be defined as the

limit toward which the ratio of the favourable to the whole number ofobserved cases approaches (the uniformity of nature being presupposed) as

the observations are indefinitely continued. Lastly, as concerns the nature or

relation of the events in question, an important distinction remains. Those

events are either simple or compound. By a compound event is meant one of

which the expression in language, or the conception in thought, depends upon

the expression or the conception of other events, which, in relation to it, may

be regarded as simple events. To say "it rains," or to say "it thunders," is to

express the occurrence of a simple event; but to say "it rains and thunders," or

to say "it either rains or thunders," is to express that of a compound event.

For the expression of that event depends upon the elementary expressions, "it

rains," "it thunders." The criterion of simple events is not, therefore, any

supposed simplicity in their nature. It is founded solely on the mode of their

expression in language or conception in thought.

14. Now one general problem, which the existing theory of Probabilities

enables us to solve, is the following, viz.:—Given the probabilities of any

simple events: required the probability of a given compound event, i. e. of an

event compounded in a given manner out of the given simple events. The

problem can also be solved when the compound event, whose probability is

required, is subjected to given conditions, i. e. to conditions dependent also in

a given manner on the given simple events. Beside this general problem,

there exist also particular problems of which the principle of solution is

known. Various questions relating to causes and effects can be solved by

known methods under the particular hypothesis that the causes are mutually

exclusive, but apparently not otherwise. Beyond this it is not clear that any

advance has been made toward the solution of what may be regarded as the

general problem of the science, viz.: Given the probabilities of any events,

simple or compound, conditioned or unconditioned: required the probability

of any other event equally arbitrary in expression and conception. In the

statement of this question it is not even postulated that the events whose

probabilities are given, and the one whose probability is sought, should

involve some common elements, because it is the office of a method to

determine whether the data of a problem are sufficient for the end in view,

and to indicate, when they are not so, wherein the deficiency consists.

This problem, in the most unrestricted form of its statement, is resolvable

by the method of the present treatise; or, to speak more precisely, its

theoretical solution is completely given, and its practical solution is broughtto depend only upon processes purely mathematical, such as the resolution

and analysis of equations. The order and character of the general solution

may be thus described.

15. In the first place it is always possible, by the preliminary method of the

Calculus of Logic, to express the event whose probability is sought as a

logical function of the events whose probabilities are given. The result is of

the following character: Suppose that X represents the event whose

probability is sought, A, B, C, &c. the events whose probabilities are given,

those events being either simple or compound. Then the tchole relation of the

event X to the events A, B, C, &c. is deduced in the form of what

mathematicians term a development, consisting, in the most general case, of

four distinct classes of terms. By the first class arc expressed those

combinations of the events A, B, C, which both necessarily accompany and

necessarily indicate the occurrence of the event X; by the second class, those

combinations which necessarily accompany, but do not necessarily imply, the

occurrence of the event X; by the third class, those combinations whose

occurrence in connexion with the event X is impossible, but not otherwise

impossible; by the fourth class, those combinations whose occurrence is

impossible under any circumstances. I shall not dwell upon this statement of

the result of the logical analysis of the problem, further than to remark that

the elements which it presents are precisely those by which the expectation of

the event X, as dependent upon our knowledge of the events A, B, C, is, or

alone can be, affected. General reasoning would verify this conclusion; but

general reasoning would not usually avail to disentangle the complicated web

of events and circumstances from which the solution above described must be

evolved. The attainment of this object constitutes the first step towards the

complete solution of the question proposed. It is to be noted that thus far the

process of solution is logical, i. e. conducted by symbols of logical

significance, and resulting in an equation interpretable into a proposition. Let

this result be termed the final logical equation.

The second step of the process deserves attentive remark. From the final

logical equation to which the previous step has conducted us, are deduced, by

inspection, a series of algebraic equations implicitly involving the complete

solution of the problem proposed. Of the mode in which this transition is

effected let it suffice to say, that there exists a definite relation between the

laws by which the probabilities of events are expressed as algebraic functionsof the probabilities of other events upon which they depend, and the laws by

which the logical connexion of the events is itself expressed. This relation,

like the other coincidences of formal law which have been referred to, is not

founded upon hypothesis, but is made known to us by observation (1.4), and

reflection. If,however, its reality were assumed dpriori as the basis of the

very definition of Probability, strict deduction would thence lead us to the

received numerical definition as a necessary consequence. The Theory of

Probabilities stands, as it has already been remarked (1.12), in equally close

relation to Logic and to Arithmetic; and it is indifferent, so far as results arc

concerned, whether we regard it as springing out of the latter of these

sciences, or as founded in the mutual relations which connect the two

together.

16. There are some circumstances, interesting perhaps to the

mathematician, attending the general solutions deduced by the above method,

which it may be desirable to notice.

1st. As the method is independent of the number and the nature of the data,

it continues to be applicable when the latter are insufficient to render

determinate the value sought. When such is the case, the final expression of

the solution will contain terms with arbitrary constant coefficients. To such

terms there will correspond terms in the final logical equation (I. 15), the

interpretation of which will inform us what new data are requisite in order to

determine the values of those constants, and thus render the numerical

solution complete. If such data are not to be obtained, we can still, by giving

to the constants their limiting values 0 and 1, determine the limits within

which the probability sought must lie independently of all further experience.

When the event whose probability is sought is quite independent of those

whose probabilities are given, the limits thus obtained for its value will be 0

and 1, as it is evident that they ought to be, and the interpretation of the

constants will only lead to a re-statement of the original problem.

  2ndly. The expression of the final solution will in all cases involve a

particular element of quantity, determinable by the solution of an algebraic

equation. Now when that equation is of an elevated degree, a difficulty may

seem to arise as to the selection of the proper root. There are, indeed, cases in

which both the elements given and the element sought are so obviously

restricted by necessary conditions that no choice remains. But in complex

instances the discovery of such conditions, by unassisted force of reasoning,would be hopeless. A distinct method is requisite for this end,—a method

which might not inappropriately be termed the Calculus of Statistical

Conditions. Into the nature of this method I shall not here further enter

i

than to say, that, like the previous method, it is based upon the employment

of the "final logical equation," and that it definitely assigns, 1st, the

conditions which must be fulfilled among the numerical elements of the data,

in order that the problem may be real, i. e. derived from a possible

experience; 2ndly, the numerical limits, within which the probability sought

must have been confined, if, instead of being determined by theory, it had

been deduced directly by observation from the same system of phamomena

from which the data were derived. It is clear that these limits will be actual

limits of the probability sought. Now, on supposing the data subject to the

conditions above assigned to them, it appears in every instance which I have

examined that there exists one root, and only one root, of the final algebraic

equation which is subject to the required limitations. Every source of

ambiguity is thus removed. It would even seem that new truths relating to the

theory of algebraic equations are thus incidentally brought to light. It is

remarkable that the special element of quantity, to which the previous

discussion relates, depends only upon the data, and not at all upon the qua-sit

urn of the problem proposed. Hence the solution of each particular problem

unties the knot of difficulty for a system of problems, viz., for that system of

problems which is marked by the possession of common data, independently

of the nature of their quasita. This circumstance is important whenever from

a particular system of data it is required to deduce a series of connected

conclusions. And it further gives to the solutions of particular problems that

character of relationship, derived from their dependence upon a central and

fundamental unity, which not unfrequently marks the application of general

methods.

17. But though the above considerations, with others of a like nature,

justify the assertion that the method of this treatise, for the solution of

questions in the theory of Probabilities, is a general method, it does not

thence follow that we are relieved in all cases from the necessity of recourse

to hypothetical grounds. It has been observed that a solution may consist

entirely of terms affected by arbitrary constant coefficients,—may, in fact, be

wholly indefinite. The application of the method of this work to some of themost important questions within its range would— were the data of

experience alone employed—present results of this character. To obtain a

definite solution it is necessary, in such cases, to have recourse to hypotheses

possessing more or less of independent probability, but incapable of exact

verification. Generally speaking, such hypotheses will differ from the

immediate results of experience in partaking of a logical rather than of a

numerical character; in prescribing the conditions under which phenomena

occur, rather than assigning the relative frequency of their occurrence. This

circumstance is, however, unimportant. Whatever their nature may be, the

hypotheses assumed must thenceforth be regarded as belonging to the actual

data, although tending, as is obvious, to give to the solution itself somewhat

of a hypothetical character. With this understanding as to the possible sources

of the data actually employed, the method is perfectly general, but for the

correctness of the hypothetical elements introduced it is of course no more

responsible than for the correctness of the numerical data derived from

experience.

In illustration of these remarks we may observe that the theory of the

reduction of astronomical observations* rests, in part, upon hypothetical

grounds. It assumes certain positions as to the nature of error, the equal

probabilities of its occurrence in the form of excess or defect, &c., without

which it would be impossible to obtain any definite conclusions from a

system of conflicting observations. But granting such positions as the above,

the residue of the investigation falls strictly within the province of the theory

of Probabilities. Similar observations apply to the important problem which

proposes to deduce from the records of the majorities of a deliberative

assembly the mean probability of correct judgment in one of its members. If

the method of this treatise be applied to the mere numerical data, the solution

obtained is of that wholly indefinite kind above described. And to show in a

more eminent degree the insufficiency of those data by themselves, the

interpretation of the arbitrary constants (I. 16) which appear in the solution,

merely produces

• The author designs to treat this subject either in a separate work or in a

future Appendix. In the present treatise he avoids the use of the integral

calculus.

a re-statement of the original problem. Admitting, however, the hypothesis of

the independent formation of opinion in the individual mind, eitherabsolutely, as in the speculations of Laplace and Poisson, or under limitations

imposed by the actual data, as will be seen in this treatise, Chap, xxI., the

problem assumes a far more definite character. It will be manifest that the

ulterior value of the theory of Probabilities must depend very much upon the

correct formation of such mediate hypotheses, where the purely experimental

data are insufficient* for definite solution, and where that further experience

indicated by the interpretation of the final logical equation is unattainable.

Upon the other hand, an undue readiness to form hypotheses in subjects

which from their very nature are placed beyond human ken, must re-act upon

the credit of the theory of Probabilities, and tend to throw doubt in the

general mind over its most legitimate conclusions.

18. It would, perhaps, be premature to speculate here upon the question

whether the methods of abstract science are likely at any future day to render

service in the investigation of social problems at all commensurate with those

which they have rendered in various departments of physical inquiry. An

attempt to .resolve this question upon pure a priori grounds of reasoning

would be very likely to mislead us. For example, the consideration of human

free-agency would seem at first sight to preclude the idea that the movements

of the social system should ever manifest that character of orderly evolution

which we are prepared to expect under the reign of a physical necessity. Yet

already do the researches of the statist reveal to us facts at variance with such

an anticipation. Thus the records of crime and pauperism present a degree of

regularity unknown in regions in which the disturbing influence of human

wants and passions is unfelt. On the other hand, the distemperature of

seasons, the eruption of volcanoes, the spread of blight in the vegetable, or of

epidemic maladies in the animal kingdom, things apparently or chiefly the

product of natural causes, refuse to be submitted to regular and apprehensible

laws. "Fickle as the wind," is a proverbial expression. Reflection upon these

points teaches us in some degree to correct our earlier judgments. We learn

that we are not to

\

expect, under the dominion of necessity, an order perceptible to human

observation, unless the play of its producing causes is sufficiently simple;

nor, on the other hand, to deem that' free agency in the individual is

inconsistent with regularity in the motions of the system of which he forms a

component unit. Human freedom stands out as an apparent fact of ourconsciousness, while it is also, I conceive, a highly probable deduction of

analogy (Chap, xxn.) from the nature of that portion of the mind whose

scientific constitution we are able to investigate. But whether accepted as a

fact reposing on consciousness, or as a conclusion sanctioned by the reason,

it must be so interpreted as not to conflict with an established result of

observation, viz.: that phenomena, in the production of which large masses of

men arc concerned, do actually exhibit a very remarkable degree of

regularity, enabling us to collect in each succeeding age the elements upon

which the estimate of its state and progress, so -far as manifested in outward

results, must depend. There is thus no sound objection d priori against the

possibility of that species of data which is requisite for the experimental

foundation of a science of social statistics. Again, whatever other object this

treatise may accomplish, it is presumed that it will leave no doubt as to the

existence of a system of abstract principles and of methods founded upon

those principles, by which any collective body of social data may be made to

yield, in an explicit form, whatever information they implicitly involve.

There may, where the data are exceedingly complex, be very great difficulty

in obtaining this information,—difficulty due not to any imperfection of the

theory, but to the laborious character of the analytical processes to which it

points. It is quite conceivable that in many instances that difficulty may be

such as only united effort could overcome. But that we possess theoretically

in all cases, and practically, so far as the requisite labour of calculation may

be supplied, the means of evolving from statistical records the seeds of

general truths which lie buried amid the mass of figures, is a ]>osition which

may, I conceive, with perfect safety be affirmed.

19. But beyond these general positions I do not venture to speak in terms

of assurance. Whether the results which might be expected from the

application of scientific methods to statistical records, over and above those

the discovery of which requires no such aid, would so far compensate for the

labour involved as to render it worth while to institute such investigations

upon a proper scale of magnitude, is a point which could, perhaps, only be

determined by experience. It is to be desired, and it might without great

presumption be expected, that in this, as in other instances, the abstract

doctrines of science should minister to more than intellectual gratification.

Nor, viewing the apparent order in which the sciences have been evolved,

and have successively contributed their aid to the service of mankind, does it

seem very improbable that a day may arrive in which similar aid may accruefrom departments of the field of knowledge yet more intimately allied with

the elements of human welfare. Let the speculations of this treatise, however,

rest at present simply upon their claim to be regarded as true.

20. I design, in the last place, to endeavour to educe from the scientific

results of the previous inquiries some general intimations respecting the

nature and constitution of the human mind. Into the grounds of the possibility

of this species of inference it is not necessary to enter here. One or two

general observations may serve to indicate the track which I shall endeavour

to follow. It cannot but be admitted that our views of the science of Logic

must materially influence, perhaps mainly determine, our opinions upon the

nature of the intellectual faculties. For example, the question whether

reasoning consists merely in the application of certain first or necessary

truths, with which the mind has been originally imprinted, or whether the

mind is itself a seat of law, whose operation is as manifest and as conclusive

in the particular as in the general formula, or whether, as some not

undistinguished writers seem to maintain, all reasoning is of particulars; this

question, I say, is one which not merely affects the science of Logic, but also

concerns the formation of just views of the constitution of the intellectual

faculties. Again, if it is concluded that the mind is by original constitution a

seat of law, the question of the nature of its subjection to this law,—whether,

for instance, it is an obedience founded upon necessity, like that which

sustains the revolutions <tf the heavens, and preserves the order of Nature,—

or whether it is a subjection of some quite distinct kind, is also a matter of

deep speculative interest. Further, if the mind is truly determined to be a

subject of law, and if its laws also are truly assigned, the question of their

probable or necessary influence upon the course of human thought in

different ages is one invested with great importance, and well deserving a

patient investigation, as matter both of philosophy and of history. These and

other questions I propose, however imperfectly, to discuss In the concluding

portion of the present work. They belong, perhaps, to the domain of probable

or conjectural, rather than to that of positive, knowledge. But it may happen

that where there is not sufficient warrant for the certainties of science, there

may be grounds of analogy adequate for the suggestion of highly probable

opinions. It has seemed to me better that this discussion should be entirely

reserved for the sequel of the main business of this treatise,—which is the

investigation of scientific truths and laws. Experience sufficiently instructs us

that the proper order of advancement in all inquiries after truth is to proceedfrom the known to the unknown. There are parts, even of the philosophy and

constitution of the human mind, which have been placed fully within the

reach of our investigation. To make a due acquaintance with those portions of

our nature the basis of all endeavours to penetrate amid the shadows and

uncertainties of that conjectural realm which lies beyond and above them, is

the course most accordant with the limitations of our present condition.  CHAPTER II.

OF SIGNS IN GENERAL, AND OF THE SIGNS APPROPRIATE TO THE

SCIENCE OF LOGIC IN PARTICULAR ; ALSO OF THE LAWS TO

WHICH THAT CLASS OF SIGN8 ARE SUBJECT.

1. HHHAT Language is an instrument of human reason, and -*- not merely a

medium for the expression of thought, is a truth generally admitted. It is

proposed in this chapter to inquire what it is that renders Language thus

subservient to the most important of our intellectual faculties. In the various

steps of this inquiry we shall be led to consider the constitution of Language,

considered as a system adapted to an end or purpose; to investigate its

elements; to seek to determine their mutual relation and dependence; and to

inquire in what manner they contribute to the attainment of the end to which,

as co-ordinate parts of a system, they have respect.

In proceeding to these inquiries, it will not be necessary to enter into the

discussion of that famous question of the schools, whether Language is to be

regarded as an essential instrument of reasoning, or whether, on the other

hand, it is possible for us to reason without its aid. I suppose this question to

be beside the design of the present treatise, for the following reason, viz., that

it is the business of Science to investigate laws; and that, whether we regard

signs as the representatives of things and of their relations, or as the

representatives of the conceptions and operations of the human intellect, in

studying the laws of signs, we are in effect studying the manifested laws of

reasoning. If there exists a difference between the two inquiries, it is one

which does not affect the scientific expressions of formal law, which are the

object of investigation in the present stage of this work, but relates only to the

mode in which those results are presented to the mental regard. For though in

investigating the laws of signs, a posteriori, the immediate subject of

examination is Language, with the rules which govern its use; while in

making the internal processes of thought the direct object of inquiry, we

appeal in a more immediate way to our personal consciousness,—it will be

found that in both cases the results obtained are formally equivalent. Nor

could we easily conceive, that the unnumbered tongues and dialects of the

earth should have preserved through a long succession of ages so much that is

common and universal, were we not assured of the existence of some deep

foundation of their, agreement in the laws of the mind itself.2. The elements of which all language consists are signs or symbols.

Words are signs. Sometimes they are said to represent things; sometimes the

operations by which the mind combines together the simple notions of things

into complex conceptions ; sometimes they express the relations of action,

passion, or mere quality, which we perceive to exist among the objects of our

experience; sometimes the emotions of the perceiving mind. But words,

although in this and in other ways they fulfil the office of signs, or

representative symbols, are not the only signs which we are capable of

employing. Arbitrary marks, which speak only to the eye, and arbitrary

sounds or actions, which address themselves to some other sense, are equally

of the nature of signs, provided that their representative office is defined and

understood. In the mathematical sciences, letters, and the symbols +, -, =,

&c., are used as signs, although the term "sign" is applied to the latter class of

symbols, which represent operations or relations, rather than to the former,

which represent the elements of number and quantity. As the real import of a

sign does not in any way depend upon its particular form or expression, so

neither do the laws which determine its use. In the present treatise, however,

it is with written signs that we have to do, and it is with reference to these

exclusively that the term " sign" will be employed. The essential properties of

signs are enumerated in the following definition.

  Definition.—A sign is an arbitrary mark, having a fixed interpretation, and

susceptible of combination with other signs in subjection to fixed laws

dependent upon their mutual interpretation.

3. Let us consider the particulars involved in the above definition

separately.

(1.) In the first place, a sign is an arbitrary mark. It is clearly indifferent

what particular word or token we associate with a given idea, provided that

the association once made is permanent. The Romans expressed by the word

" civitas" what we designate by the word "state." But both they and we might

equally well have employed any other word to represent the same conception.

Nothing, indeed, in the nature of Language would prevent us from using a

mere letter in the same sense. Were this done, the laws according to which

that letter would require to be used would be essentially the same with the

laws which govern the use of " civitas" in the Latin, and of " state" in the

English language, so far at least as the use of those words is regulated by any

general principles common to all languages alike.(2.) In the second place, it is necessary that each sign should possess,

within the limits of the same discourse or process of reasoning, a fixed

interpretation. The necessity of this condition is obvious, and seems to be

founded in the very nature of the subject. There exists, however, a dispute as

to the precise nature of the representative office of words or symbols used as

names in the processes of reasoning. By some it is maintained, that they

represent the conceptions of the mind alone; by others, that they represent

things. The question is not of great importance here, as its decision cannot

affect the laws according to which signs are employed. I apprehend, however,

that the general answer to this and such like questions is, that in the processes

of reasoning, signs stand in the place and fulfil the office of the conceptions

and operations of the mind; but that as those conceptions and operations

represent things, and the connexions and relations of things, so signs

represent things with their connexions and relations; and lastly, that as signs

stand in the place of the conceptions and operations of the mind, they are

subject to the laws of those conceptions and operations. This view will be

more fully elucidated in the next chapter; but it here serves to explain the

third of those particulars involved in the definition of a sign, viz., its

subjection to fixed laws of combination depending upon the nature of its

interpretation.

4. The analysis and classification of those signs by which the

operations of reasoning are conducted will be considered in the following

Proposition:

  PROPOSITION I.

All the operations of Language, as an instrument of reasoning, may be

conducted by a system of signs composed of the following elements, viz.:

1st. Literal symbols, as x, y, fyc, representing things as subjects of our

conceptions.

2nd. Signs of operation, as+,-,*, standing for those operations of the mind

by which the conceptions of things are combined or resolved so as to form

new conceptions involving the same elements.

3rd. The sign of identity, =.

  And these symbols of Logic are in their use subject to definite laws, partlyagreeing with and partly differing from the laws of the corresponding

symbols in the science of Algebra.

Let it be assumed as a criterion of the true elements of rational discourse,

that they should be susceptible of combination in the simplest forms and by

the simplest laws, and thus combining should generate all other known and

conceivable forms of language; and adopting this principle, let the following

classification be considered.

                                        CLASS I.

5. Appellative or descriptive signs, expressing either the name of a thing,

or some quality or circumstance belonging to it.

To this class we may obviously refer the substantive proper or common,

and the adjective. These may indeed be regarded as differing only in this

respect, that the former expresses the substantive existence of the individual

thing or things to which it refers; the latter implies that existence. If we attach

to the adjective the universally understood subject " being" or " thing," it

becomes virtually a substantive, and may for all the essential purposes of

reasoning be replaced by the substantive. Whether or not, in every particular

of the mental regard, it is the same thing to say, "Water is a fluid thing," as to

say, "Water is fluid;" it is at least equivalent in the expression of the

processes of reasoning.

It is clear also, that to the above class we must refer any sign which may

conventionally be used to express some circumstance or relation, the detailed

exposition of which would involve the use of many signs. The epithets of

poetic diction are very frequently of this kind. They are usually compounded

adjectives, singly fulfilling the office of a many-worded description. Homer's

"deep-eddying ocean" embodies a virtual description in the single word

fiaOuSivriQ. And conventionally any other description addressed either to

the imagination or to the intellect might equally be represented by a single

sign, the use of which would in all essential points be subject to the same

laws as the use of the adjective " good" or " great." Combined with the

subject " thing," such a sign would virtually become a substantive; and by a

single substantive the combined meaning both of thing and quality might be

expressed.

6. Now, as it has been defined that a sign is an arbitrary mark, it ispermissible to replace all signs of the species above described by letters. Let

us then agree to represent the class of individuals to which a particular name

or description is applicable, by a single letter, as x. If the name is " men," for

instance, let x represent "all men," or the class "men." By a class is usually

meant a collection of individuals, to each of which a particular name or

description may be applied; but in this work the meaning of the term will be

extended so as to include the case in which but a single individual exists,

answering to the required name or description, as well as the cases denoted

by the terms "nothing" and "universe," which as "classes" should be

understood to comprise respectively "no beings," "all beings." Again, if an

adjective, as "good," is employed as a term of description, let us represent by

a letter, as y, all things to which the description " good" is applicable, i. e. "all

good things," or the class "good things." Let it further be agreed, that by the

combination xy shall be represented that class of things to which the names or

descriptions represented by x and y are simultaneously applicable. Thus, if x

alone stands for " white things," and y for " sheep," let xy stand for " white

sheep;" and in like manner, if z stand for " horned things," and x and y retain

their previous interpretations, let zxy represent

"horned white sheep," i. e. that collection of things to which the name

"sheep," and the descriptions " white" and " horned" are together applicable.

Let us now consider the laws to which the symbols x,y, &c., used in the

above sense, are subject.

7. First, it is evident, that according to the above combinations, the order in

which two symbols are written is indifferent. The expressions xy and yx

equally represent that class of things to the several members of which the

names or descriptions x and y are together applicable. Hence we have,

xy=yx. (1)

In the case of x representing white things, and y sheep, either of the

members of this equation will represent the class of" white sheep." There

may be a difference as to the order in which the conception is formed, but

there is none as to the individual things which are comprehended under it. In

like manner, if x represent "estuaries," andy "rivers," the expressions xy and

yx will indifferently represent " rivers that are estuaries," or "estuaries that are

rivers," the combination in this case being in ordinary language that of two

substantives, instead of that of a substantive and an adjective as in theprevious instance. Let there be a third symbol, as z, representing that class of

things to which the term " navigable" is applicable, and any one of the

following

expressions,

                                  zxy, zyx, xyz, &c,

will represent the class of " navigable rivers that are estuaries."

If one of the descriptive terms should have some implied reference to

another, it is only necessary to include that reference expressly in its stated

meaning, in order to render the above remarks still applicable. Thus, if x

represent "wise" and y "counsellor," we shall have to define whether x

implies wisdom in the absolute sense, or only the wisdom of counsel. With

such definition the law xy = yx continues to be valid.

We are permitted, there/ore, to employ the symbols x, y, z, Sfc, in the place

of the substantives, adjectives, and descriptive phrases sultject to the rule of

interpretation, that any expression in which several of these symbols are

written together shall represent all tlie objects or individuals to which their

several meanings are together applicable, and to the law that the order in

which the symbols succeed each oilier is indifferent.

As the rule of interpretation has been sufficiently exemplified, I shall deem

it unnecessary always to express the subject "things" in defining the

interpretation of a symbol used for an adjective. When I say, let x represent

"good," it will be understood that x only represents " good" when a subject

for that quality is supplied by another symbol, and that, used alone, its

interpretation will be "good things."

8. Concerning the law above determined, the following observations,

which will also be more or less appropriate to certain other laws to be

deduced hereafter, may be added.

First, I would remark, that this law is a law of thought, and not, properly

speaking, a law of things. . Difference in the order of the qualities or

attributes of an object, apart from all questions of causation, is a difference in

conception merely. The law (1) expresses as a general truth, that the same

thing may be conceived in different ways, and states the nature of that

difference; and it does no more than this.  Secondly, As a law of thought, it is actually developed in a law of

Language, the product and the instrument of thought. Though the tendency of

prose writing is toward uniformity, yet even there the order of sequence of

adjectives absolute in their meaning, and applied to the same subject, is

indifferent, but poetic diction borrows much of its rich diversity from the

extension of the same lawful freedom to the substantive also. The language of

Milton is peculiarly distinguished by this species of variety. Not only does

the substantive often precede the adjectives by which it is qualified, but it is

frequently placed in their midst. In the first few lines of the invocation to

Light, we meet with such examples as the following:

                          "Offspring of heaven first-born."

  "The rising world of waters dark and deep."

  "Bright effluence of bright essence increate."

Now these inverted forms are not simply the fruits of a poetic license.

They are the natural expressions of a freedom sanetioned by the intimate laws

of thought, but for reasons of convenience not exercised in the ordinary use

of language.

  Thirdly, The law expressed by (1) may be characterized by saying that the

literal symbols x, y, z, are commutative, like the symbols of Algebra. In saying

this, it is not affirmed that the process of multiplication in Algebra, of which

the fundamental law is expressed by the equation

xy = yx,

possesses in itself any analogy with that process of logical combination

which xy has been made to represent above; but only that if the arithmetical

and the logical process are expressed in the same manner, their symbolical

expressions will be subject to the same formal law. The evidence of that

subjection is in the two cases quite distinct.

9. As the combination of two literal symbols in the form xy expresses the

whole of that class of objects to which the names or qualities represented by x

and y are together applicable, it follows that if the two symbols have exactly

the same signification, their combination expresses no more than either of the

symbols taken alone would do. In such case we should therefore have

xy = x.As y is, however, supposed to have the same meaning as x, we may replace it

in the above equation by x, and we thus get

xx = x.

Now in common Algebra the combination xx is more briefly represented by
*
x. Let us adopt the same principle of notation here; for the mode of

expressing a particular succession of mental operations is a thing in itself

quite as arbitrary as the mode of expressing a single idea or operation (II. 3).

In accordance with this notation, then, the above equation assumes the form

2
x = x, (2)

and is, in fact, the expression of a second general law of those symbols by

which names, qualities, or descriptions, are symbolically represented.

The reader must bear in mind that although the symbols x and y in the

examples previously formed received significations distinct from each other,

nothing prevents us from attributing to them precisely the same signification.

It is evident that the more nearly their actual significations approach to each

other, the more nearly does the class of things denoted by the combination xy

approach to identity with the class denoted by x, as well as with that denoted

by y. The case supposed in the demonstration of the equation (2) is that of

absolute identity of meaning. The law which it expresses is practically

exemplified in language. To say "good, good," in relation to any subject,

though a cumbrous and useless pleonasm, is the same as to say "good." Thus

"good, good" men, is equivalent to "good" men. Such repetitions of words are

indeed sometimes employed to heighten a quality or strengthen an

affirmation. But this effect is merely secondary and conventional; it is not

founded in the intrinsic relations of language and thought. Most of the

operations which we observe in nature, or perform ourselves, are of such a

kind that their effect is augmented by repetition, and this circumstance

prepares us to expect the same thing in language, and even to use repetition

when we design to speak with emphasis. But neither in strict reasoning nor in

exact discourse is there any just ground for such a practice.

10. We pass now to the consideration of another class of the signs of

speech, and of the laws connected with their use.

  CLASS II.11. Signs of those mental operations whereby we collect parts into a

whole, or separate a whole into its parts.

We are not only capable of entertaining the conceptions of objects, as

characterized by names, qualities, or circumstances, applicable to each

individual of the group under consideration, but also of forming the aggregate

conception of a group of objects consisting of partial groups, each of which is

separately named or described. For this purpose we use the conjunctions

"and," "or," &c. "Trees and minerals," "barren mountains, or fertile vales,"

are examples of this kind. In strictness, the words "and," "or," interposed

between the terms descriptive of two or more classes of objects, imply that

those classes are quite distinct, so that no member of one is found in another.

In this and in all other respects the words " and" " or" are analogous with the

sign + in algebra, and their laws are identical. Thus the expression "men and

women" is, conventional meanings set aside, equivalent with the expression

"women and men." Let x represent " men," y, "women;" and let + stand for

"and" and "or," then we have

x + y = y + x, (3)

an equation which would equally hold true if x and y represented numbers,

and + were the sign of arithmetical addition.

Let the symbol z stand for the adjective "European," then since it is, in

effect, the same thing to say "European men and women," as to say "

European men and European women," we have

z (x + y) = zx + zy. (4)

And this equation also would be equally true were x, y, and z symbols of

number, and were the juxtaposition of two literal symbols to represent their

algebraic product, just as in the logical signification previously given, it

represents the class of objects to which both the epithets conjoined belong.

The above are the laws which govern the use of the sign +, here used to

denote the positive operation of aggregating parts into a whole. But the very

idea of an operation effecting some positive change seems to suggest to us

the idea of an opposite or negative operation, having the effect of undoing

what the former one has done. Thus we cannot conceive it possible to collect

parts into a whole, and not conceive it also possible to separate a part from a

whole. This operation we express in common language by the sign except, as,"All men except Asiatics," "All state.-! except those which are monarchical."

Here it is implied that the things excepted ibrm a part of the things from

which they are excepted. As we have expressed the operation of aggregation

by the sign +, so we may express the negative operation above described by -

minus. Thus if x be taken to represent men, and y, Asiatics, i. e. Asiatic men,

D

then the conception of "All men except Asiatics" will be expressed by x - y.

And if we represent by x, "states," and by y the descriptive property "having a

monarchical form," then the conception of " All states except those which are

monarchical" will be expressed by x - xy.

As it is indifferent for all the essential purposes of reasoning whether we

express excepted cases first or last in the order of speech, it is also indifferent

in what order we write any series of terms, some of which are affected by the

sign -. Thus we have, as in the common algebra,

                                                                          xm,r5
 - y  - y +- ()

Still representing by x the class "men," and by y "Asiatics," let z represent the

adjective "white." Now to apply the adjective "white" to the collection of men

expressed by the phrase "Men except Asiatics," is the same as to say, "White

men, except white Asiatics." Hence we have

                                                                  z (« - y) - zx - zy. (6)

This is also in accordance with the laws of ordinary algebra.

The equations (4) and (6) may be considered as exemplification of a single

general law, which may be stated by saying, that the literal symbols, x, y, z,

Sfc. are distributive in their operation. The general fact which that law

expresses is this, viz.:—If any quality or circumstance is ascribed to all the

members of a group, formed either by aggregation or exclusion of partial

groups, the resulting conception is the same as if the quality or circumstance

were first ascribed to each member of the partial groups, and the aggregation

or exclusion effected afterwards. That which is ascribed to the members of

the whole is ascribed to the members of all its parts, howsoever those parts

are connected together.

  CLASS III.12. Signs by which relation is expressed, and by which we form

propositions.

  Though all verbs may with propriety be referred to this class, it is

sufficient for the purposes of Logic to consider it as including only the

substantive verb is or are, since every other verb may be resolved into this

element, and one of the signs included under Class I. For as those signs are

used to express quality or circumstance of every kind, they may be employed

to express the active or passive relation of the subject of the verb, considered

with reference either to past, to present, or to future time. Thus the

Proposition, "Cesar conquered the Gauls," may be resolved into "Cesar is he

who conquered the Gauls." The ground of this analysis I conceive to be the

following:—Unless we understand what is meant by having conquered the

Gauls, i. e. by the expression "One who conquered the Gauls," we cannot

understand the sentence in question. It is, therefore, truly an element of that

sentence; another element is "Cesar," and there is yet another required, the

copula is, to show the connexion of these two. I do not, however, affirm that

there is no other mode than the above of contemplating the relation expressed

by the proposition, "Cesar conquered the Gauls;" but only that the analysis

here given is a correct one for the particular point of view which has been

taken, and that it suffices for the purposes of logical deduction. It may be

remarked that the passive and future participles of the Greek language imply

the existence of the principle which has been asserted, viz.: that the sign is or

are may be regarded as an element of every personal verb.

13. The above sign, is or are, may be expressed by the symbol =. The laws,

or as would usually be said, the axioms which the symbol introduces, are next

to be considered.

Let us take the Proposition, "The stars are the suns and the planets," and let

us represent stars by x, suns by y, and planets by z; we have then

* = V + *• (7)

Now if it be true that the stars are the suns and the planets, it will follow that

the stars, except the planets, are suns. This would give the equation

x-z=y, (8)

which must therefore be a deduction from (7). Thus a term z has been

removed from one side of an equation to the other by changing its sign. Thisis in accordance with the algebraic rule of transposition.

But instead of dwelling upon particular cases, we may at once affirm the

general axioms :—

1st. If equal things are added to equal things, the wholes are equal.

2nd. If equal things are taken from equal things, the remainders are equal.

And it hence appears that we may add or subtract equations, and employ

the rule of transposition above given just as in common algebra.

Again: If two classes of things, x and y, be identical, that is, if all the

members of the one are members of the other, then those members of the one

class which possess a given property z will be identical with those members

of the other which possess the same property z. Hence if we have the

equation

x = y;

then whatever class or property z may represent, we have also

zx = zy.

This is formally the same as the algebraic law :— If both members of an

equation are multiplied by the same quantity, the products arc equal.

In like manner it may be shown that if the corresponding members of two

equations are multiplied together, the resulting equation is true.

14. Here, however, the analogy of the present system with that of algebra,

as commonly stated, appears to stop. Suppose it true that those members of a

class x which possess a certain property z are identical with those members of

a class y which possess the same property z, it does not follow that the

members of the class x universally are identical with the members of the class

y. Hence it cannot be inferred from the equation

zx = zy, that the equation

x = y

is also true. In other words, the axiom of algebraists, that both sides of an

equation may be divided by the same quantity, has no formal equivalent here.

I say no formal equivalent, because, in accordance with the general spirit of

these inquiries, it is not even sought to determine whether the mentaloperation which is represented by removing a logical symbol, z, from a

combination zx, is in itself analogous with the operation of division in

Arithmetic. That mental operation is indeed identical with what is commonly

termed Abstraction, and it will hereafter appear that its laws are dependent

upon the laws already deduced in this chapter. What has now been shown is,

that there does not exist among those laws anything analogous in form with a

commonly received axiom of Algebra.

But a little consideration will show that even in common algebra that

axiom does not possess the generality of those other axioms which have been

considered. The deduction of the equation x = y from the equation zx = zy is

only valid when it is known that z is not equal to 0. If then the value z - 0 is

supposed to be admissible in the algebraic system, the axiom above stated

ceases to be applicable, and the analogy before exemplified remains at least

unbroken.

15. However, it is not with the symbols of quantity generally that it is of

any importance, except as a matter of speculation, to trace such affinities. We

have seen (II. 9) that the symbols of Logic are subject to the special law,



Now of the symbols of Number there are but two, viz. 0 and 1, which are
                                                      2a
subject to the same formal law. We know that 0 = 0, and that l= 1; and the
          z
equation x - x, considered as algebraic, has no other roots than 0 and 1.

Hence, instead of determining the measure of formal agreement of the

symbols of Logic with those of Number generally, it is more immediately

suggested to us to compare them with symbols of quantity admitting only of

the values 0 and 1. Let us conceive, then, of an Algebra in which the symbols

x, y, z, &c. admit indifferently of the values 0 and 1, and of these values

alone. The laws, the axioms, and the processes, of such an Algebra will be

identical in their whole extent with the laws, the axioms, and the processes of

an Al

gebra of Logic. Difference of interpretation will alone divide them. Upon this

principle the method of the following work is established.

16. It now remains to Bhow that those constituent parts of ordinary

language which have not been considered in the previous sections of this

chapter are either resolvable into the same elements as those which have beenconsidered, or are subsidiary to those elements by contributing to their more

precise definition. •

The substantive, the adjective, and the verb, together with the particles

and, except, we have already considered. The pronoun may be regarded as a

particular form of the substantive or the adjective. The adverb modifies the

meaning of the verb, but does not affect its nature. Prepositions contribute to

the expression of circumstance or relation, and thus tend to give precision and

detail to the meaning of the literal symbols. The conjunctions if, either, or,

are used chiefly in the expression of relation among propositions, and it will

hereafter be shown that the same relations can be completely expressed by

elementary symbols analogous in interpretation, and identical in form and

law with the symbols whose use and meaning have been explained in this

Chapter. As to any remaining elements of speech, it will, upon examination,

be found that they are used either to give a more definite significance to the

terms of discourse, and thus enter into the interpretation of the literal symbols

already considered, or to express some emotion or state of feeling

accompanying the utterance of a proposition, and thus do not belong to the

province of the understanding, with which alone our present concern lies.

Experience of its use will testify to the sufficiency of the classification which

has been adopted.  CHAPTER III.

DERIVATION OF THE LAWS OF THE SYMBOLS OF LOGIC FROM

THE LAWS OF THE OPERATIONS OF THE HUMAN MIND.

  r
1 .  I^HE object of science, properly so called, is the knowledge -*- of laws

and relations. To be able to distinguish what is essential to this end, from

what is only accidentally associated with it, is one of the most important

conditions of scientific progress. I say, to distinguish between these elements,

because a consistent devotion to science does not require that the attention

should be altogether withdrawn from other speculations, often of a

metaphysical nature, with which it is not unfrequently connected. Such

questions, for instance, as the existence of a sustaining ground of phenomena,

the reality of cause, the propriety of forms of speech implying that the

successive states of things are connected by operations, and others of a like

nature, may possess a deep interest and significance in relation to science,

without being essentially scientific. It is indeed scarcely possible to express

the conclusions of natural science without borrowing the language of these

conceptions. Nor is there necessarily any practical inconvenience arising

from this source. They who believe, and they who refuse to believe, that there

is more in the relation of cause and effect than an invariable order of

succession, agree in their interpretation of the conclusions of physical

astronomy. But they only agree because they recognise a common element of

scientific truth, which is independent of their particular views of the nature of

causation.

2. If this distinction is important in physical science, much more does it

deserve attention in connexion with the science of the intellectual powers. For

the questions which this science presents become, in expression at least,

almost necessarily mixed up with modes of thought and language, which

betray a metaphysical origin. The idealist would give to the laws of reasoning

one form of expression; the sceptic, if true to his principles, another. They

who regard the phenomena with which we are concerned in this inquiry as

the mere successive states of the thinking subject devoid of any causal

connexion, and they who refer them to the operations of an active

intelligence, would, if consistent, equally differ in their modes of statement.

Like difference would also result from a difference of classification of the

mental faculties. Now the principle which I would here assert, as affording us

the only ground of confidence and stability amid so much of seeming and ofreal diversity, is the following, viz., that if the laws in question are really

deduced from observation, they have a real existence as laws of the human

mind, independently of any metaphysical theory which may seem to be

involved in the mode of their statement. They contain an element of truth

which no ulterior criticism upon the nature, or even upon the reality, of the

mind's operations, can essentially affect. Let it even be granted that the mind

is but a succession of states of consciousness, a series of fleeting impressions

uncaused from without or from within, emerging out of nothing, and

returning into nothing again,— the last refinement of the sceptic intellect,—

still, as laws of succession, or at least of a past succession, the results to

which observation had led would remain true. They would require to be

interpreted into a language from whose vocabulary all such terms as cause

and effect, operation and subject, substance and attribute, had been banished;

but they would still be valid as scientific truths.

  Moreover, as any statement of the laws of thought, founded upon actual

observation, must thus contain scientific elements which are independent of

metaphysical theories of the nature of the mind, the practical application of

such elements to the construction of a system or method of reasoning must

also be independent of metaphysical distinctions. For it is upon the scientific

elements involved in the statement of the laws, that any practical application

will rest, just as the practical conclusions of physical astronomy are

independent of any theory of the cause of gravitation, but rest only on the

knowledge of its phenomenal effects. And, therefore, as respects both the

determi

nation of the laws of thought, and the practical use of them . when

discovered, we are, for all really scientific ends, unconcerned with the truth

or falsehood of any metaphysical speculations whatever.

3. The course which it appears to me to be expedient, under these

circumstances, to adopt, is to avail myself as far as possible of the language

of common discourse, without regard to any theory of the nature and powers

of the mind which it may be thought to embody. For instance, it is agreeable

to common usage to say that we converse with each other by the

communication of ideas, or conceptions, such communication being the

office of words; and that with reference to any particular ideas or conceptions

presented to it, the mind possesses certain powers or faculties by which the

mental regard maybe fixed upon some ideas, to the exclusion of others, or bywhich the given conceptions or ideas may, in various ways, be combined

together. To those faculties or powers different names, as Attention, Simple

Apprehension, Conception or Imagination, Abstraction, &c., have been

given,—names which have not only furnished the titles of distinct divisions

of the philosophy of the human mind, but passed into the common language

of men. Whenever, then, occasion shall occur to use these terms, I shall do so

without implying thereby that I accept the theory that the mind possesses

such and such powers and faculties as distinct elements of its activity. Nor is

it indeed necessary to inquire whether such powers of the understanding have

a distinct existence or not. We may merge these different titles under the one

generic name of Operations of the human mind, define these operations so

far as is necessary for the purposes of this work, and then seek to express

their ultimate laws. Such will be the general order of the course which I shall

pursue, though reference will occasionally be made to the names which

common agreement has assigned to the particular states or operations of the

mind which may fall under our notice.

It will be most convenient to distribute the more definite results of the

following investigation into distinct Propositions.

  PROPOSITION I.

4. To deduce the laws of the symbols of Logic from a consideration of

those operations of the mind which are implied in Hie strict use of language

as an instrument of reasoning.

In every discourse, whether of the mind conversing with its own thoughts,

or of the individual in his intercourse with others, there is an assumed or

expressed limit within which the subjects of its operation are confined. The

most unfettered discourse is that in which the words we use are understood in

the widest possible application, and for them the limits of discourse are co-

extensive with those of the universe itself. But more usually we confine

ourselves to a less spacious field. Sometimes, in discoursing of men we imply

(without expressing the limitation) that it is of men only under certain

circumstances and conditions that we speak, as of civilized men, or of men in

the vigour of life, or of men under some other condition or relation. Now,

whatever may be the extent of the field within which all the objects of our

discourse are found, that field may properly be termed the universe of

discourse.5. Furthermore, this universe of discourse is in the strictest sense the

ultimate subject of the discourse. The office of any name or descriptive term

employed under the limitations supposed is not to raise in the mind the

conception of all the beings or objects to which that name or description is

applicable, but only of those which exist within the supposed universe of

discourse. If that universe of discourse is the actual universe of things, which

it always is when our words are taken in their real and literal sense, then by

men we mean all men that exist; but if the universe of discourse is limited by

any antecedent implied understanding, then it is of men under the limitation

thus introduced that we speak. It is in both cases the business of the word

men to direct a certain operation of the mind, by which, from the proper

universe of discourse, we select or fix upon the individuals signified.

6. Exactly of the same kind is the mental operation implied by the use of

an adjective. Let, for instance, the universe of discourse be the actual

Universe. Then, as the word men directs



us to select mentally from that Universe all the beings to which the term

"men" is applicable; so the adjective "good," in the combination " good men,"

directs us still further to select mentally from the class of men all those who

possess the further quality "good;" and, if another adjective were prefixed to

the combination "good men," it would direct a further operation of the same

nature, having reference to that further quality which it might be chosen to

express.

It is important to notice carefully the real nature of the operation here

described, for it is conceivable, that it might have been different from what it

is. Were the adjective simply attributive in its character, it would seem, that

when a particular set of beings is designated by men, the prefixing of the

adjective good would direct us to attach mentally to all those beings the

quality of goodness. But this is not the real office of the adjective. The

operation which we really perform is one of selection according to a

prescribed principle or idea. To what faculties of the mind such an operation

would be referred, according to the received classification of its powers, it is

not important to inquire, but I suppose that it would be considered as

dependent upon the two faculties of Conception or Imagination, and

Attention. To the one of these faculties might be referred the formation of thegeneral conception; to the other the fixing of the mental regard upon those

individuals within the prescribed universe of discourse which answer to the

conception. If, however, as seems not improbable, the power of Attention is

nothing more than the power of continuing the exercise of any other faculty

of the mind, we might properly regard the whole of the mental process above

described as referrible to the mental faculty of Imagination or Conception, the

first step of the process being the conception of the Universe itself, and each

succeeding step limiting in a definite manner the conception thus formed.

Adopting this view, I shall describe each such step, or any definite

combination of such steps, as a definite act of conception. And the use of this

term I shall extend so as to include in its meaning not only the conception of

classes of objects represented by particular names or simple attributes of

quality, but also the combination of such conceptions in any manner

consistent with the powers and limitations of the human mind; indeed, any

intellectual operation short of that which is involved in the structure of a

sentence or proposition. The general laws to which such operations of the

mind are subject are now to be considered.

7. Now it will be shown that the laws which in the preceding chapter have

been determined a posteriori from the constitution of language, for the use of

the literal symbols of Logic, are in reality the laws of that definite mental

operation which has just been described. We commence our discourse with a

certain understanding as to the limits of its subject, i. e. as to the limits of its

Universe. Every name, every term of description that we employ, directs him

whom we address to the performance of a certain mental operation upon that

subject. And thus is thought communicated. But as each name or descriptive

term is in this view but the representative of an intellectual operation, that

operation being also prior in the order of nature, it is clear that the laws of the

name or symbol must be of a derivative character,—must, in fact, originate in

those of the operation which they represent. That the laws of the symbol and

of the mental process are identical in expression will now be shown.

8. Let us then suppose that the universe of our discourse is the actual

universe, so that words are to be used in the full extent of their meaning, and

let us consider the two mental operations implied by the words "white" and

"men." The word "men" implies the operation of selecting in thought from its

subject, the universe, all men; and the resulting conception, men, becomes the

subject of the next operation. The operation implied by the word "white" isthat of selecting from its subject, "men," all of that class which are white. The

final resulting conception is that of "white men." Now it is perfectly apparent

that if the operations above described had been performed in a converse

order, the result would have been the same. Whether we begin by forming the

conception of "men," and then by a second intellectual act limit that

conception to "white men," or whether we begin by forming the conception

of " white objects," and then limit it to such of that class as arc "men," is

perfectly indifferent so far as the result is concerned. It is obvious that the

order of the mental processes would be equally indifferent if for the words

"white" and "men" we substituted any other descriptive or appellative terms

whatever, provided only that their meaning was fixed and absolute. And thus

the indifference of the order of two successive acts of the faculty of

Conception, the one of which furnishes the subject upon which the other is

supposed to operate, is a general condition of the exercise of that faculty. It is

a law of the mind, and it is the real origin of that law of the literal symbols of

Logic which constitutes its formal expression (1) Chap. n.

9. It is equally clear that the mental operation above described is of such a

nature that its effect is not altered by repetition. Suppose that by a definite act

of conception the attention has been fixed upon men, and that by another

exercise of the same faculty we limit it to those of the race who are white.

Then any further repetition of the latter mental act, by which the attention is

limited to white objects, does not in any way modify the conception arrived

at, viz., that of white men. This is also an example of a general law of the

mind, and it has its formal expression in the law ((2) Chap, n.) of the literal

symbols.

10. Again, it is manifest that from the conceptions of two distinct classes of

things we can form the conception of that collection of things which the two

classes taken together compose; and it is obviously indifferent in what order

of position or of priority those classes are presented to the mental view. This

is another general law of the mind, and its expression is found in (3) Chap. II.

11. It is not necessary to pursue this course of inquiry and comparison.

Sufficient illustration has been given to render manifest the two following

positions, viz.:

First, That the operations of the mind, by which, in the exercise of its

power of imagination or conception, it combines and modifies the simpleideas of things or qualities, not less than those operations of the reason which

are exercised upon truths and propositions, are subject to general laws.

  Secondly, That those laws are mathematical in their form-, and that they

are actually developed in the essential laws of human language. Wherefore

the laws of the symbols of Logic are deducible from a consideration of the

operations of the mind in reasoning.

12. The remainder of this chapter will be occupied with questions relating
                                                  2
to that law of thought whose expression is x = x (II. 9), a law which, as has

been implied (II. 15), forms the characteristic distinction of the operations of

the mind in its ordinary discourse and reasoning, as compared with its

operations when occupied with the general algebra of quantity. An important

part of the following inquiry will consist in proving that the symbols 0 and 1

occupy a place, and are susceptible of an interpretation, among the symbols

of Logic; and it may first be necessary to show how particular symbols, such

as the above, may with propriety and advantage be employed in the

representation of distinct systems of thought.

The ground of this propriety cannot consist in any community of

interpretation. For in systems of thought so truly distinct as those of Logic

and Arithmetic (I use the latter term in its widest sense as the science of

Number), there is, properly speaking, no community of subject. The one of

them is conversant with the very conceptions of things, the other takes

account solely of their numerical relations. But inasmuch as the forms and

methods of any system of reasoning depend immediately upon the laws to

which the symbols are subject, and only mediately, through the above link of

connexion, upon their interpretation, there may be both propriety and

advantage in employing the same symbols in different systems of thought,

provided that such interpretations can be assigned to them as shall render

their formal laws identical, and their use consistent. The ground of that

employment will not then be community of interpretation, but the community

of the formal laws, to which in their respective systems they are subject. Nor

must that community of formal laws be established upon any other ground

than that of a careful observation and comparison of those results which are

seen to flow independently from the interpretations of the systems under

consideration.

  These observations will explain the process of inquiry adopted in thefollowing Proposition. The literal symbols of Logic are universally subject to

the law whose expression is xi = x. Of the symbols of Number there are two

only, 0 and 1, which satisfy this law. But each of these symbols is also

subject to a law peculiar to itself in the system of numerical magnitude, and

this suggests the inquiry, what interpretations must be given to the literal

symbols of Logic, in order that the same peculiar and formal laws may be

realized in the logical system also.

  PROPOSITION II.

13. To determine the logical value and significance of the symbols 0 and 1.

The symbol 0, as used in Algebra, satisfies the following formal law,

  0xy = 0, or 0y = 0, (1)

whatever number y may represent. That this formal law may be obeyed in the

system of Logic, we must assign to the symbol 0 such an interpretation that

the class represented by Og may be identical with the class represented by 0,

whatever the class g may be. A little consideration will show that this

condition is satisfied if the symbol 0 represent Nothing. In accordance with a

previous definition, we may term Nothing a class. In fact, Nothing and

Universe are the two limits of class extension, for they are the limits of the

possible interpretations of general names, none of which can relate to fewer

individuals than are comprised in Nothing, or to more than are comprised in

the Universe. Now whatever the class g may be, the individuals which are

common to it and to the class "Nothing" are identical with those comprised in

the class "Nothing," for they are none. And thus by assigning to 0 the

interpretation Nothing, the law (1) is satisfied; and it is not otherwise satisfied

consistently with the perfectly general character of the class y.

  Secondly, The symbol 1 satisfies in the system of Number the following

law, viz.,

                                1 x y = y, or ly = y,

whatever number y may represent. And this formal equation being assumed

as equally valid in the system of this work, in which 1 and y represent classes,

it appears that the symbol 1 must represent such a class that all the

individuals which are found in any proposed class y are also all the

individuals ly that are common to that class y and the class represented by 1.A little consideration will here show that the class represented by 1 must be

"the Universe," since this is the only class in which are found all the

individuals that exist in any class. Hence the respective interpretations of the

symbols 0 and 1 in the system of Logic are Nothing and Universe.

14. As with the idea of any class of objects as "men," there is suggested to

the mind the idea of the contrary class of beings which are not men; and as

the whole Universe is made up of these two classes together, since of every

individual which it comprehends we may affirm either that it is a man, or that

it is not a man, it becomes important to inquire how such contrary names are

to be expressed. Such is the object of the following Proposition.

  PROPOSITION III.

If x represent any class of objects, then will 1 - x represent the contrary or

supplementary class of objects, i. e. the class including all objects iohich are

not comprehended in the class x.

For greater distinctness of conception let x represent the class men, and let

us express, according to the last Proposition, the Universe by 1; now if from

the conception of the Universe, as consisting of " men" and "not-men," we

exclude the conception of " men," the resulting conception is that of the

contrary class, "not-men." Hence the class "not-men" will be represented by 1

- x. And, in general, whatever class of objects is represented by the symbol x,

the contrary class will be expressed by 1 - x.

15. Although the following Proposition belongs in strictness to a future

chapter of this work, devoted to the subject of maxims or necessary truths,

yet, on account of the great importance of that law of thought to which it

relates, it has been thought proper to introduce it here.



  PROPOSITION IV.

That axiom of metaphysicians which is termed ilie principle of

contradiction, and which affirms that it is impossible for any being to possess

a quality, and at the same time not to possess it, is a consequence of tlie
                                                          ,
fundamental law of thought, whose expression is x = J:.

Let us write this equation in the formx - x* = 0, whence we have

z(l-x) = 0; (1)

both these transformations being justified by the axiomatic laws of

combination and transposition (II. 13). Let us, for simplicity of conception,

give to the symbol x the particular interpretation of men, then 1 - x will

represent the class of "not-men" (Prop. in.) Now the formal product of the

expressions of two classes represents that class of individuals which is

common to them both (II. 6). Hence x(l - x) will represent the class whose

members are at once "men," and " not men," and the equation (1) thus

express the principle, that a class whose members are at the same time men

and not men does not exist. In other words, that it is impossible for the same

individual to be at the same time a man and not a man. Now let the meaning

of the symbol x be extended from the representing of "men," to that of any

class of beings characterized by the possession of any quality whatever; and

the equation (1) will then express that it is impossible for a being to possess a

quality and not to possess that quality at the same time. But this is identically

that "principle of contradiction" which Aristotle has described as the

fundamental axiom of all philosophy. "It is impossible that the same quality

should both belong and not belong to the same thing... This is the most

certain of all principles... Wherefore they who demonstrate refer to this as an

ultimate opinion. For it is by nature the source of all the other axioms."*

                                                        v
• TA yap avrb ana virap\nv TI Kai aij virapx*i ddvvarov rip avrip cai Kara

TO airo. .. Aiiri2 ifj iraoiiv lari (.iifiaioraril TU>V dpx&v... Aio iravri£ ol
                                                                                Kairv
airodeirvivreQ ei'c rauri2v avdyovaiv laxdriiv io^av (jiiiau yap iipx't  u

aKKuv

almuaruv airii irdvruv Metaphysica, IU. 3.

E

The above interpretation has been introduced not on account of its

immediate value in the present system, but as an illustration of a significant

fact in the philosophy of the intellectual powers, viz., that what has been

commonly regarded as the fundamental axiom of metaphysics is but the

consequence of a law of thought, mathematical in its form. I desire to direct

attention also to the circumstance that the equation (1) in which that

fundamental law of thought is expressed is an equation of the seconddegree.* Without speculating at all in this chapter upon the question, whether

that circumstance is necessary in its own nature, we may venture to assert that

if it had not existed, the whole procedure of the understanding would have

been different from what it is. Thus it is a consequence of the fact that the

fundamental equation of thought is of the second degree, that we perform the

operation of analysis and classification, by division into pairs of opposites,

or, as it is technically said, by dichotomy. Now if the equation in question had

been of the third degree, still admitting of interpretation as such, the mental

division must have been threefold in character, and we must have proceeded

by a species of trichotomy, the real nature of which it is impossible for us,

with our existing faculties, adequately to conceive, but the laws of which we

might still investigate as an object of intellectual speculation.

      • Should it here be said that the existence of the equation x* = x
                                                            2
    necessitates also the existence of the equation x = x, which is of the

    third degree, and then inquired whether that equation does not indicate a
                                                                      2
    process of trichotomy; the answer is, that the equation x = x is not

      interprctable in the system of logic. For writing it in either of the forms

                                                                    «(l-,)(l + «) =0, (2)

                                                                      x(l-x)(-l-x) = 0, (3)

    we see that its interpretation, if possible at all, must involve that of the

    factor 1 + x, or of the factor - 1 — x. The former is not interprctable,

    because we cannot conceive of the addition of any class x to the

    universe 1; the latter is not interpret able, because the symbol — 1 is not

    subject to the law x (1 - x) = 0, to which all class symbols are subject.
                            2
    Hence the equation x = x admits of no interpretation analogous to that

    of the equation x2 = x. Were the former equation, however, true

      independently of the latter, i. e. were that act of the mind which is

    denoted by the symbol x, such that its second repetition should

    reproduce the result of a single operation, but not its first or mere

    repetition, it is presumable that we should be able to interpret one of the

    forms (2), (3), which under the actual conditions of thought we cannot

    do. There exist operations, known to the mathematician, the law of
                                                                    2
    which may be adequately expressed by the equation x = x. But they are

    of a nature altogether foreign to the province of general reasoning.

      In saying that it is conceivable that the law of thought might have    been different from what it is, I mean only that we can frame such an

    hypothesis, and study its consequences. The possibility of doing this

    involves no such doctrine as that the actual law of human reason is the

    product either of chance or of arbitrary will.

16. The law of thought expressed by the equation (1) will, lor reasons

which are made apparent by the above discussion, be occasionally referred to

as the "law of duality."  CHAPTER IV.

OF THE DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS INTO THE TWO CLASSES OF

"PRIMARY" AND " SECONDARY;" OF THE CHARACTERISTIC

PROPERTIES OF THOSE CLASSES, AND OF THE LAWS OF THE

EXPRESSION OF PRIMARY PROPOSITIONS.

1. r I^HE laws of those mental operations which are concerned -*- in the

processes of Conception or Imagination having been investigated, and the

corresponding laws of the symbols by which they are represented explained,

we are led to consider the practical application of the results obtained: first, in

the expression of the complex terms of propositions; secondly, in the

expression of propositions; and lastly, in the construction of a general method

of deductive analysis. In the present chapter we shall be chiefly concerned

with the first of these objects, as an introduction to which it is necessary to

establish the following Proposition:

  PROPOSITION I.

All logical propositions may be considered as belonging to one or the

other of two great classes, to which the respective names of "Primary" or "

Concrete Propositions" and " Secondary" or " Abstract Propositions," may

be given.

  Every assertion that we make may be referred to one or the other of the

two following kinds. Either it expresses a relation among things, or it

expresses, or is equivalent to the expression of, a relation among

propositions. An assertion respecting the properties of things, or the

phenomena which they manifest, or the circumstances in which they are

placed, is, properly speaking, the assertion of a relation among things. To say

that "snow is white," is for the ends of logic equivalent to saying, that "snow

is a white thing." An assertion respecting facts or events, their mutual

connexion and dependence, is, for the same ends, generally equivalent to the

assertion, that such and such propositions concerning those events have a

certain relation to each other as respects their mutual truth or falsehood. The

former class of propositions, relating to things, I call " Primary;" the latter

class, relating to propositions, I call " Secondary." The distinction is in

practice nearly but not quite co-extensive with the common logical distinction

of propositions as categorical or hypothetical.For instance, the propositions, "The sun shines," "The earth is' warmed,"

are primary; the proposition, "If the sun shines the earth is warmed," is

secondary. To say, "The sun shines," is to say, "The sun is that which shines,"

and it expresses a relation between two classes of things, viz., "the sun" and

"things which shine." The secondary proposition, however, given above,

expresses a relation of dependence between the two primary propositions, "

The sun shines," and " The earth is warmed." I do not hereby affirm that the

relation between these propositions is, like that which exists between the

facts which they express, a relation of causality, but only that the relation

among the propositions so implies, and is so implied by, the relation among

the facts, that it may for the ends of logic be used as a fit representative of

that relation.

2. If instead of the proposition, " The sun shines," we say, "It is true that

the sun shines," we then speak not directly of things, but of a proposition

concerning things, viz., of the proposition, "The sun shines." And, therefore,

the proposition in which we thus speak is a secondary one. Every primary

proposition may thus give rise to a secondary proposition, viz., to that

secondary proposition which asserts its truth, or declares its falsehood.

It will usually happen, that the particles if, either, or, will indicate that a

proposition is secondary; but they do not necessarily imply that such is the

case. The proposition, "Animals are either rational or irrational," is primary.

It cannot be resolved into "Either animals are rational or animals are

irrational," and it does not therefore express a relation of dependence between

the two propositions connected together in the latter disjunctive sentence. The

particles, either, or, are in fact no criterion of the nature of propositions,

although it happens that they are more frequently found in secondary

propositions. Even the conjunction if may be found in primary propositions.

"Men are, if wise, then temperate," is an example of the kind. It cannot be

resolved into "If all men are wise, then all men are temperate."

3. As it is not my design to discuss the merits or defects of the ordinary

division of propositions, I shall simply remark here, that the principle upon

which the present classification is founded is clear and definite in its

application, that it involves a real and fundamental distinction in

propositions, and that it is of essential importance to the development of a

general method of reasoning. Nor does the fact that a primary proposition

may be put into a form in which it becomes secondary at all conflict with theviews here maintained. For in the case thus supposed, it is not of the things

connected together in the primary proposition that any direct account is

taken, but only of the proposition itself considered as true or as false.

4. In the expression both of primary and of secondary propositions, the

same symbols, subject, as it will appear, to the same laws, will be employed

in this work. The difference between the two cases is a difference not of form

but of interpretation. In both cases the actual relation which it is the object of

the proposition to express will be denoted by the sign =. In the expression of

primary propositions, the members thus connected will usually represent the

"terms" of a proposition, or, as they are more particularly designated, its

subject and predicate.

  PROPOSITION II.

5. To deduce a general metlwd, founded upon the enumeration of possible

varieties, for the expression of any class or collection of things, which mag

constitute a " term" of a Primary Proposition.

First, If the class or collection of things to be expressed is defined only by

names or qualities common to all the individuals of which it consists, its

expression will consist of a single term, in which the symbols expressive of

those names or qualities will be combined without any connecting sign, as if

by the algebraic process of multiplication. Thus, if x represent opaque

substances, y polished substances, z stones, we shall have,




xyz = opaque polished stones;

xy (1 - z) = opaque polished substances which are not stones; x (1 - y) (1 - z) =

opaque substances which are not polished, and are not stones;

and so on for any other combination. Let it be observed, that each of these

expressions satisfies the same law of duality, as the individual symbols which

it contains. Thus,

xyz x xyz = xyz;

xy (1 - z) x xy (1 - z) = xy (1 - z);

and so on. Any such term as the above we shall designate as a " class term,"because it expresses a class of things by means of the common properties or

names of the individual members of such class.

  Secondly, If we speak of a collection of things, different portions of which

are defined by different properties, names, or attributes, the expressions for

those different portions must be separately formed, and then connected by the

sign +. But if the collection of which we desire to speak has been formed by

excluding from some wider collection a defined portion of its members, the

sign - must be prefixed to the symbolical expression of the excluded portion.

Respecting the use of these symbols some further observations may be added.

6. Speaking generally, the symbol + is the equivalent of the conjunctions

"and," "or," and the symbol -, the equivalent of the preposition "except." Of

the conjunctions " and" and " or," the former is usually employed when the

collection to be described forms the subject, the latter when it forms the

predicate, of a proposition. "The scholar and the man of the world desire

happiness," may be taken as an illustration of one of these cases. "Things

possessing utility are either productive of pleasure or preventive of pain,"

may exemplify the other. Now whenever an expression involving these

particles presents itself in a primary proposition, it becomes very important to

know whether the groups or classes separated in thought by them are

intended to be quite distinct from each other and mutually exclusive, or not.

Does the expression, " Scholars and men of the world," include or exclude

those who are both? Does the expression, "Either productive of pleasure or

preventive of pain," include or exclude things which possess both these

qualities? I apprehend that in strictness of meaning the conjunctions "and,"

"or," do possess the power of separation or exclusion here referred to; that the

formula, "All x's are either y's or z's," rigorously interpreted, means, "All x's

are either y's, but not z's," or, "z's but not y's." But it must at the same time be

admitted, that the "jus et norma loquendi" seems rather to favour an opposite

interpretation. The expression, "Either y's or z's," would generally be

understood to include things that are y's and z's at the same time, together

with things which come under the one, but not the other. Remembering,

however, that the symbol + does possess the separating power which has

been the subject of discussion, we must resolve any disjunctive expression

which may come before us into elements really separated in thought, and then

connect their respective expressions by the symbol +.

And thus, according to the meaning implied, the expression, "Things whichare either x's or y's," will have two different symbolical equivalents. If we

mean, "Things which are x's, but not y's, or y's, but not .z's," the expression

will be

  *(!-#) + y(l-«);

the symbol x standing for x's, y for y's. If, however, we mean, "Things which

are either x's, or, if not x's, then y's," the expression will be

x + y (1 - x).

This expression supposes the admissibility of things which are both x's and

y's at the same time. It might more fully be expressed in the form

xy + x(l-y)+y(l-x);

but this expression, on addition of the two first terms, only reproduces the

former one.

Let it be observed that the expressions above given satisfy the fundamental

law of duality (III. 16). Thus we have

  {*(l-y) + y(l-*))2-*(l-y) + y(l-tf),

                  2
[x + y (1 - x)) = x + y(l - x).

It will be seen hereafter, that this is but a particular manifestotion of a general

law of expressions representing "classes or collections of things."

7. The results of these investigations may be embodied in the following

rule of expression.

  RULE.—Express simple names or qualities by tlie symbols x, y, z, 4"c, their

contraries by 1 - x, 1 - y, 1 - z, fyc.; classes of things defined by common

names or qualities, by connecting the corresponding symbols as in

multiplication; collections of things, consisting of portions different from

each other, by connecting the expressions of those portions by the sign +. In

particular, let the expression, " Either x's orys," be expressed by x (1 - y) + y

(1 - x), when the classes denoted by x and y are exclusive, by x + y (1 - x)

when they are not exclusive. Similarly let the expression, "Either x's, or y's,

or z's," be expressed by x (1 - y) (1 - z) + y (1 - x) (1 - z) + z (1 - x) (1 - y),

when the classes denoted by x, y, and z, are designed to be mutually

exclusive, by x + y (1 - x) + z (1 - x) (1-y), when they are not meant to be

exclusive, and so on.8. On this rule of expression is founded the converse rule of interpretation.

Both these will be exemplified with, perhaps, sufficient fulness in the

following instances. Omitting for brevity the universal subject "things," or "

beings," let us assume

x - hard, y = elastic, z = metals;

and we shall have the following results:

  "Non-elastic metals," will be expressed by z (1 - y); "Elastic substances

with non-elastic metals," by y + z (1 - y);

  "Hard substances, except metals," by x -y; "Metallic substances, except

those which are neither hard nor elastic," by z-z (1 - x) (1 -y),orbyz {1 - (1 -

x) (l-y)), vide (6), Chap. II.

In the last example, what we had really to express was "Metals, except not

hard, not elastic, metals." Conjunctions used between adjectives are usually

superfluous, and, therefore, must not be expressed symbolically.

  Thus, "Metals hard and elastic," is equivalent to "Hard elastic metals," and

expressed by xyz.

Take next the expression, " Hard substances, except those which are

metallic and non-elastic, and those which are elastic and non-metallic." Here

the word those means hard substances, so that the expression really means,

Hard substances except hard substances, metallic, non-elastic, and hard

substances non-metallic, elastic; the word except extending to both the

classes which follow it. The complete expression is

x- {xz{l-y) + xy(l- z)}; or, x - xz (1 - y) - xy (1 - z).

9. The preceding Proposition, with the different illustrations which have

been given of it, is a necessary preliminary to the following one, which will

complete the design of the present chapter.

  PROPOSITION III.

To deduce from an examination of their possible varieties a general

methodfor the expression of Primary or Concrete Propositions.

A primary proposition, in the most general sense, consists of two terms,

between which a relation is asserted to exist. These terms are not necessarily

single-worded names, but may represent any collection of objects, such as wehave been engaged in considering in the previous sections. The mode of

expressing those terms is, therefore, comprehended in the general precepts

above given, and it only remains to discover how the relations between the

terms are to be expressed. This will evidently depend upon the nature of the

relation, and more particularly upon the question whether, in that relation, the

terms are understood to be universal or particular, i. e. whether we speak of

the whole of that collection of objects to which a term refers, or indefinitely

of the whole or of a part of it, the usual signification of the prefix, "some."

  Suppose that we wish to express a relation of identity between the two

classes, "Fixed Stars" and "Suns," i. e. to express .that " All fixed stars are

suns," and "All suns are fixed stars." Here, if x stand for fixed stars, and y for

suns, we shall have

x = y

for the equation required.

In the proposition, "All fixed stars are suns," the term "all fixed stars"

would be called the subject, and "suns" the predicate. Suppose that we extend

the meaning of the terms subject and predicate in the following manner. By

subject let us mean the first term of any affirmative proposition, i. e. the term

which precedes the copula is or are; and by predicate let us agree to mean the

second term, i. e. the one which follows the copula; and let us admit the

assumption that either of these may be universal or particular, so that, in

either case, the whole class may be implied, or only a part of it. Then we shall

have the following Rule for cases such as the one in the last example:—

10. RULE.— When both Subject and Predicate of a Proposition are

universal, form the separate expressions for them, and connect them by the

sign =.

This case will usually present itself in the expression of the definitions of

science, or of subjects treated after the manner of pure science. Mr. Senior's

definition of wealth affords a good example of this kind, viz.:

  "Wealth consists of things transferable, limited in supply, and either

productive of pleasure or preventive of pain."

Before proceeding to express this definition symbolically, it must be

remarked that the conjunction and is superfluous. Wealth is really defined byits possession of three properties or qualities, not by its composition out of

three classes or collections of objects. Omitting then the conjunction and, let

us make

to = wealth.

t = things transferable.

* = limited in supply.

p = productive of pleasure.

r = preventive of pain.

Now it is plain from the nature of the subject, that the expression, "Either

productive of pleasure or preventive of pain," in the above definition, is

meant to be equivalent to " Either productive of pleasure; or, if not productive

of pleasure, preventive of pain." Thus the class of things which the above

expression, taken alone, would define, would consist of all things productive

of pleasure, together with all things not productive of pleasure, but preventive

of pain, and its symbolical expression would be

            r
/> + 0 ~P)'

If then we attach to this expression placed in brackets to denote that both its

terms are referred to, the symbols * and t limiting its application to things

"transferable" and "limited in supply," we obtain the following symbolical

equivalent for the original definition, viz.:

                                                                w = st {p + r(l -p)}. (1)

If the expression, "Either productive of pleasure or preventive of pain," were

intended to point out merely those things which are productive of pleasure

without being preventive of pain, p (1 - r), or preventive of pain, without

being productive of pleasure, r (1 - p) (exclusion being made of those things

which are both productive of pleasure and preventive of pain), the expression

in symbols of the definition would be

to-,tip(l-r)  r(l-p)). (2)
          +

All this agrees with what has before been more generally stated. The reader

may be curious to inquire what effect would be produced if we literally

translated the expression, "Things productive of pleasure or preventive ofpain," by p + r, making the symbolical equation of the definition to be

                                                                      w = st(j> + r). (3)

The answer is, that this expression would be equivalent to (2), with the

additional implication that the classes of things denoted by stp and str are

quite distinct, so that of things transferable and limited in supply there exist

none in the universe which are at the same time both productive of pleasure

and preventive of pain. How the full import of any equation may be

determined will be explained hereafter. What has been said may show that

before attempting to translate our data into the rigorous language of symbols,

it is above all things necessary to ascertain the intended import of the words

we are using. But this necessity cannot be regarded as an evil by those who

value correctness of thought, and regard the right employment of language as

both its instrument and its safeguard. would be exactly equivalent, v being an

indefinite class symbol. The form (4) is, however, the better, as the

expression

11. Let us consider next the case in which the predicate of the proposition

is particular, e. g. "All men are mortal."

In this case it is clear that our meaning is, "All men are some mortal

beings," and we must seek the expression of the predicate, "some mortal

beings." Represent then by v, a class indefinite in every respect but this, viz.,

that some of its members are mortal beings, and let x stand for "mortal

beings,"then will vx represent "some mortal beings." Hence if y represent

men, the equation sought will be

y = vx.

  From such considerations we derive the following Rule, for expressing an

affirmative universal proposition whose predicate is particular:

  RULE.—Express as before the subject and the predicate, attach to the latter

the indefinite symbol v, and equate the expressions.

It is obvious that v is a symbol of the same kind as x, y, &c., and that it is

subject to the general law,

2
v = v, or v (1 - w) ,= 0.

  Thus, to express the proposition, "The planets are either primary orsecondary," we should, according to the rule, proceed thus:


    Let x represent planets (the subject); 

  y = primary bodies; 

  z = secondary bodies; 


    then, assuming the conjunction "or" to separate absolutely the 

    class of "primary" from that of " secondary" bodies, so far as 

    they enter into our consideration in the proposition given, we 

    find for the equation of the proposition 


x~v{y(l-z) + z(l-y)). (4)

It may be worth while to notice, that in this case the literal translation of the

premises into the form

x = v (y + z) (5)



y(l-z) + z(l-y)

consists of terms representing classes quite distinct from each other, and

satisfies the fundamental law of duality.

If we take the proposition, " The heavenly bodies are either suns, or

planets, or comets," representing these classes of things by w, x, y, z,

respectively, its expression, on the supposition that none of the heavenly

bodies belong at once to two of the divisions above mentioned, will be

to = v{x(l - y) (1 - z) + y (1 - x) (1 - z) + z(l -x) (1 -y)}.

If, however, it were meant to be implied that the heavenly bodies were either

suns, or, if not suns, planets, or, if neither suns nor planets, fixed stars, a

meaning which does not exclude the supposition of some of them belonging

at once to two or to all three of the divisions of suns, planets, and fixed stars,

—the expression required would be

w-t>{*+y(l-«) + *(l-*)(l-y)}. (6)

The above examples belong to the class of descriptions, not definitions.

Indeed the predicates of propositions are usually particular. When this is not

the case, either the predicate is a singular term, or we employ, instead of thecopula " is" or "are," some form of connexion, which implies that the

predicate is to be taken universally.

12. Consider next the case of universal negative propositions, e. g. "No

men are perfect beings."

Now it is manifest that in this case we do not speak of a class termed "no

men," and assert of this class that all its members are " perfect beings." But

we virtually make an assertion about "all men" to the effect that they are "not

perfect beings." Thus the true meaning of the proposition is this:

"All men (subject) are (copula) not perfect (predicate);" whence, if y

represent "men," and x "perfect beings," we shall have

y = c(l -ar),

and similarly in any other case. Thus we have the following Rule:

  RULE.— To express any proposition of Hie form "No x's are y's," convert it

into the form "All xs are not ys" and then proceed as in tlie previous case.

13. Consider, lastly, the case in which the subject of the proposition is

particular, e. g. " Some men are not wise." Here, as has been remarked, the

negative not may properly be referred, certainly, at least, for the ends of

Logic, to the predicate wise; for we do not mean to say that it is not true that

"Some men are wise," but we intend to predicate of " some men" a want of

wisdom. The requisite form of the given proposition is, therefore, " Some

men are not-wise." Putting, then, y for "men," x for "wise," i. e. "wise

beings," and introducing t' as the symbol of a class indefinite in all respects

but this, that it contains some individuals of the class to whose expression it

is prefixed, we have

                                    vy m v (1 - x).

14. We may comprise all that we have determined in the following general

Rule:

GENERAL RULE FOR THE SYMBOLICAL EXPRESSION OF

PRIMARY PROPOSITIONS.

1st. If the proposition is affirmative, form the expression of the subject and

that of the predicate. Should either of them be particular, attach to it the

indefinite symbol v, and then equate ihe resulting expressions.  2ndly. If the proposition is negative, express first its true meaning by

attaching the negative particle to tlie predicate, then proceed as above.

One or two additional examples may suffice for illustration.

  EX.—" No men are placed in exalted stations, and free from envious

regards."

Let y represent "men," x, "placed in exalted stations," z, "free from envious

regards."

Now the expression of the class described as "placed in exalted station,"

and "free from envious regards," is xz. Hence the contrary class, i. e. they to

whom this description does not apply, will be represented by 1 - xz, and to

this class all men are referred. Hence we have

y = v (1 - xz).

If the proposition thus expressed had been placed in the equivalent form,

"Men in exalted stations are not free from envious regards," its expression

would have been

                                    yx = v (1 - z).

It will hereafter appear that this expression is really equivalent to the previous

one, on the particular hypothesis involved, viz., that v is an indefinite class

symbol.

  EX.—" No men are heroes but those who unite self-denial to courage."

Let x = " men," y = "heroes," z = "those who practise selfdenial," w, "those

who possess courage."

The assertion really is, that "men who do not possess courage and practise

self-denial are not heroes."

  Hence we have

x (1 - zw) = »(l - y)

for the equation required.

15. In closing this Chapter it may be interesting to compare together the

great leading types of propositions symbolically expressed. If we agree to

represent by X and Y the symbolical expressions of the "terms," or thingsrelated, those types will be

                                        x =«y,

X = Y,

                                        vX = vY.

In the first, the predicate only is particular; in the second, both terms are

universal; in the third, both are particular. Some minor forms are really

included under these. Thus, if Y= 0, the

second form becomes

Z-0;

and if Y = 1 it becomes

  X=l;

both which forms admit of interpretation. It is further to be noticed, that the

expressions X and Y, if founded upon a sufficiently careful analysis of the

meaning of the "terms" of the proposition, will satisfy the fundamental law of

duality which requires that we have


    X'= X or X(l- X) = 0, 

    Y» = Y or Y(l- Y) = 0.  
  CHAPTER V.


    OF THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLICAL REASONING, AND 

   OF THE EXPANSION OR DEVELOPMENT OF EXPRESSIONS INVOLV- 

   ING LOGICAL SYMBOLS. 

      T
    1.  I^HE previous chapters of this work have been devoted to 

     -*- the investigation of the fundamental laws of the opera- 

    tions of the mind in reasoning; of their development in the 

    laws of the symbols of Logic; and of the principles of expression, 

    by which that species of propositions called primary may be repre- 

    sented in the language of symbols. These inquiries have been 

    in the strictest sense preliminary. They form an indispensable 

    introduction to one of the chief objects of this treatise—the con- 

    struction of a system or method of Logic upon the basis of an 

    exact summary of the fundamental laws of thought. There are 

    certain considerations touching the nature of this end, and the 

    means of its attainment, to which I deem it necessary here to 

    direct attention. 


2. I would remark in the first place that the generality of a method in Logic

must very much depend upon the generality of its elementary processes and

laws. We have, for instance, in the previous sections of this work

investigated, among other things, the laws of that logical process of addition

which is symbolized by the sign +. Now those laws have been determined

from the study of instances, in all of which it has been a necessary condition,

that the classes or things added together in thought should be mutually

exclusive. The expression x + y seems indeed uninterpretable, unless it be

assumed that the things represented by x and the things represented by y are

entirely separate: that they embrace no individuals in common. And

conditions analogous to this have been involved in those acts of conception

from the study of which the laws of the other symbolical operations have

been ascertained. The question then arises, whether


v

it is necessary to restrict the application of these symbolical laws and

processes by the same conditions of interpretability under which theknowledge of them was obtained. If such restriction is necessary, it is

manifest that no such thing as a general method in Logic is possible. On the

other hand, if such restriction is unnecessary, in what light are we to

contemplate processes which appear to be uninterpretable in that sphere of

thought which they are designed to aid? These questions do not belong to the

science of Logic alone. They are equally pertinent to every developed form of

human reasoning which is based upon the employment of a symbolical

language.

3. I would observe in the second place, that this apparent failure of

correspondency between process and interpretation does not manifest itself in

the ordinary applications of human reason. For no operations are there

performed of which the meaning and the application are not seen; and to most

minds it does not suffice that merely formal reasoning should connect their

premises and their conclusions; but every step of the connecting train, every

mediate result which is established in the course of demonstration, must be

intelligible also. And without doubt, this is both an actual condition and an

important safeguard, in the reasonings and discourses of common life.

  There are perhaps many who would be disposed to extend the same

principle to the general use of symbolical language as an instrument of

reasoning. It might be argued, that as the laws or axioms which govern the

use of symbols are established upon an investigation of those cases only in

which interpretation is possible, we have no right to extend their application

to other cases in which interpretation is impossible or doubtful, even though

(as should be admitted) such application is employed in the intermediate

steps of demonstration only. Were this objection conclusive, it must be

acknowledged that slight advantage would accrue from the use of a

symbolical method in Logic. Perhaps that advantage would be confined to the

mechanical gain of employing short and convenient symbols in the place of

more cumbrous ones. But the objection itself is fallacious. Whatever our d

priori anticipations might be, it is an unquestionable fact that the validity of a

conclusion arrived at by any symbolical process of reasoning, does not

depend upon our ability to interpret the formal results which have presented

themselves in the different stages of the investigation. There exist, in fact,

certain general principles relating to the use of symbolical methods, which, as

pertaining to the particular subject of Logic, I shall first state, and I shall then

offer some remarks upon the nature and upon the grounds of their claim toacceptance.

4. The conditions of valid reasoning, by the aid of symbols, are—

1st, That a fixed interpretation be assigned to the symbols employed in the

expression of the data; and that the laws of the combination of those symbols

be correctly determined from that interpretation.

2nd, That the formal processes of solution or demonstration be conducted

throughout in obedience to all the laws determined as above, without regard

to the question of the interpretability of the particular results obtained.

3rd, That the final result be interpretable in form, and that it be actually

interpreted in accordance with that system of interpretation which has been

employed in the expression of the data. Concerning these principles, the

following observations may be made.

5. The necessity of a fixed interpretation of the symbols has already been

sufficiently dwelt upon (II. 3). The necessity that the fixed result should be in

such a form as to admit of that interpretation being applied, is founded on the

obvious principle, that the use of symbols is a means towards an end, that end

being the knowledge of some intelligible fact or truth. And that this end may

be attained, the final result which expresses the symbolical conclusion must

be in an interpretable form. It is, however, in connexion with the second of

the above general principles or conditions (V. 4), that the greatest difficulty is

likely to be felt, and upon this point a few additional words are necessary.

I would then remark, that the principle in question may be considered as

resting upon a general law of the mind, the knowledge of which is not given

to us a priori, i.e. antecedently to experience, but is derived, like the

knowledge of the other laws of the mind, from the clear manifestation of the

general principle in the particular instance. A single example of reasoning, in

which symbols are employed in obedience to laws founded upon their

interpretation, but without any sustained reference to that interpretation, the

chain of demonstration conducting us through intermediate steps which are

not interpretable, to a final result which is interpretable, seems not only to

establish the validity of the particular application, but to make known to us

the general law manifested therein. No accumulation of instances can

properly add weight to such evidence. It may furnish us with clearer

conceptions of that common element of truth upon which the application ofthe principle depends, and so prepare the way for its reception. It may, where

the immediate force of the evidence is not felt, serve as a verification, a

posteriori, of the practical validity of the principle in question. But this does

not affect the position affirmed, viz., that the general principle must be seen

in the particular instance,—seen to be general in application as well as true in

the special example. The employment of the uninterpretable symbol v'-lj in

the intermediate processes of trigonometry, furnishes an illustration of what

has been said. I apprehend that there is no mode of explaining that

application which does not covertly assume the very principle in question.

But that principle, though not, as I conceive, warranted by formal reasoning

based upon other grounds, seems to deserve a place among those axiomatic

truths which constitute, in some sense, the foundation of the possibility of

general knowledge, and which may properly be regarded as expressions of

the mind's own laws and constitution.

6. The following is the mode in which the principle above stated will be

applied in the present work. It has been seen, that any system of propositions

may be expressed by equations involving symbols x, y, z, which, whenever

interpretation is possible, are subject to laws identical in form with the laws

of a system of quantitative symbols, susceptible only of the values 0 and 1

(11.15). But as the formal processes of reasoning depend only upon the laws

of the symbols, and not upon the nature of their interpretation, we are

permitted to treat the above symbols,x, y, z, as if they were quantitative

symbols of the kind above described. We may in fact lay aside the logical

interpretation of the symbols in the given equation; convert them into

quantitative symbols, susceptible only ofthe values 0 and 1; perform upon

tliem as such all the requisite processes of solution; and finally restore to

them their logical interpretation. And this is the mode of procedure which

will actually be adopted, though it will be deemed unnecessary to restate in

every instance the nature of the transformation employed. The processes to

which the symbols a, y, z, regarded as quantitative and of the species above

described, are subject, are not limited by those conditions of thought to which

they would, if performed upon purely logical symbols, be subject, and a

freedom of operation is given to us in the use of them, without which, the

inquiry after a general method in Logic would be a hopeless quest.

Now the above system of processes would conduct us to no intelligible

result, unless the final equations resulting therefrom were in a form whichshould render their interpretation, after restoring to the symbols their logical

significance, possible. There exists, however, a general method of reducing

equations to such a form, and the remainder of this chapter will be devoted to

its consideration. I shall say little concerning the way in which the method

renders interpretation possible,—this point being reserved for the next

chapter,—but shall chiefly confine myself here to the mere process

employed, which may be characterized as a process of " development." As

introductory to the nature of this process, it may be proper first to make a few

observations.

7. Suppose that we are considering any class of things with reference to

this question, viz., the relation in which its members stand as to the

possession or the want of a certain property x. As every individual in the

proposed class either possesses or does not possess the property in question,

we may divide the class into two portions, the former consisting of those

individuals which possess, the latter of those which do not possess, the

property. This possibility of dividing in thought the whole class into two

constituent portions, is antecedent to all knowledge of the constitution of the

class derived from any other source; of which knowledge the effect can only

be to inform us, more or less precisely, to what further conditions the portions

of the class which possess and which do not possess the given property are

subject. Suppose, then, such knowledge is to the following effect, viz., that

the members of that portion which possess the property x, possess also a

certain property «, and that these conditions united are a sufficient definition

of them. We may then represent that portion of the original class by the

expression ux (II. 6). If, further, we obtain information that the members of

the original class which do not possess the property x, are subject to a

condition v, and are thus defined, it is clear, that those members will be

represented by the expression v (1 -x). Hence the class in its totality will be

represented by

ux + v (1 - x);

which may be considered as a general developed form for the expression of

any class of objects considered with reference to the possession or the want

of a given property x.

The general form thus established upon purely logical grounds may also be

deduced from distinct considerations of formal law, applicable to the symbolsx, y, z, equally in their logical and in their quantitative interpretation already

referred to (V.6).

8. Definition.—Any algebraic expression involving a symbol x is termed a

function of x, and may be represented under the abbreviated general form

f{x). Any expression involving two symbols, x and y, is similarly termed a

function of ar and y, and may be represented under the general form f{x, y),

and so on for any other case.

  Thus the form f{x) would indifferently represent any of the

1 + x following functions, viz., x, l-x, , &c.; and/(a:, y) would

                                                                                  x -4* t/

equally represent any of the forms x + y, x - 2y, ^-, &c.

                                                                                    x — ly

On the same principles of notation, if in any function f{x), we change x into

1, the result will be expressed by the form /(l); if in the same function wc

change x into 0, the result will be expressed by the form f(Q). Thus, if f {x)

represent the

                                    CI + X CI + 1

function — ,/(l) will represent -, and /(0) will represent -. a

9. Definition.—Any function f(x), in which x is a logical symbol, or a

symbol of quantity susceptible only of the values 0 and 1, is said to be

developed, when it is reduced to the form ax + b (1 - x), a and b being so

determined as to make the result equivalent to the function from which it was

derived.

This definition assumes, that it is possible to represent any function f(x) in

the form supposed. The assumption is vindicated in the following

Proposition.

  PROPOSITION I.

10. To develop any function f (x) in which xis a logical symbol.

By the principle which has been asserted in this chapter, it is lawful to treat

x as a quantitative symbol, susceptible only of the values 0 and 1.  Assume then,

f(x) = ax + b (1 - x),

and making x = 1, we have

/(!) = a• Again, in the same equation making x = 0, we have

/(0)-ft.

Hence the values of a and b are determined, and substituting them in the first

equation, we have

    /(*)-/<l)*+/(0)(l-*)j (1)

as the development sought.* The second member of the equation adequately

represents the function/(ar), whatever the form of that function may be. For x

regarded as a quantitative symbol admits only of the values 0 and 1, and for

each of these values the development

      • To some it may be interesting to remark, that the development of/(x)

    obtained in this chapter, strictly holds, in the logical system, the place of

    the expansion of/(x) in ascending powers of x in the system of ordinary

    algebra. Thus it may be obtained by introducing into the expression of

    Taylor's wellknown theorem, vix.:

      /(*) */(0) +f(0)x +/- (0) ^ +/■ (0) J-^-J, 4c. (1)

                                                                  2
    the condition x (1 - x) = 0, whence we find x* = x, x = x, &c., and

  /(l)*+/(0)(l-«), assumes the same value as the function/(ar).

As an illustration, let it be required to develop the function

-—— . Here, when x- 1, we find/(l) = ^, and when x = 0,

we find/(0) = y, or 1. Hence the expression required is

1 + x 2

                                        >5«+ l-«;



l + 2a r 3

and this equation is satisfied for each of the values of which the symbol x issusceptible.

  PROPOSITION II.

To expand or develop a function involving any number of logical symbols.

Let us begin with the case in which there are two symbols, x and y, and let

us represent the function to be developed by

First, considering / (x, y) as a function of x alone, and expanding it by the

general theorem (1), we have

f(x,y)=f(l,y)xf(0,y)(l-x); (2)
            +














1@ =@+ @O +5 D L0 sey s @

But making in (1), * = 1, we got
SO =@+ O+

5 ©+5D e =r0y -5,

20d (2) becomes, on substitation,

J@=f©) +{s0)-fO)} =,
(OTIOIEEN

 

LO LD gy

 

 
    the form in question. This demonstration in supposing/(x) to be

      developable in a series of ascending powers of x is less general than the

    one in the text.

wherein/(l, y) represents what the proposed function becomes, when in it for

x we write 1, and/ (0, y) what the said function becomes, when in it for x we

write 0.

Now, taking the coefficient / (1, y), and regarding it as a function of y, and

expanding it accordingly, we have

  /(l,y)=/(l, l)y/(l,0)(l-y), (3)
                +

wherein/(l, 1) represents what/(l, y) becomes when y is made equal to 1, and

f(l, 0) what f(l, y) becomes when y is made equal to 0.

In like manner, the coefficient/(0, y) gives by expansion,

  /(0,y)-/(0,l)y+/(0,0)(l-y). (4)Substitute in (2) for/(l, y), /(0, y), their values given in (3) and (4), and we

have

/(*,y)=/(l,l)*y+/(l,0)*(l-y)+/(0, l)(l-*)y

                                                              +/(0, 0) (1 - *) (1 - y), (5)

for the expansion required. Here/*(1, 1) represents what ,/"(#, y)

becomes when we make therein «= 1, y - 1; /"(l, 0) represents

what f(x, y) becomes when we make therein x = 1, y = 0, and

so on for the rest.


                                                      1 - x 

    Thus, if/(tf, y) represent the function , we find 


  /(l.l)-Ji /(1,0) = £ = 0, /(0,l) = i, /(0,0) = l, whence the expansion of the

given function is

-a:y + 0ar(l - y) + -(1 - x)y + (1 -x) (1 -y).

It will in the next chapter be seen that the forms - and -, the

former of which is known to mathematicians as the symbol of indeterminate

quantity, admit, in such expressions as the above, of a very important logical

interpretation.

  Suppose, in the next place, that we have three symbols in the function to be

expanded, which we may represent under the general form/(ar, y, z).

Proceeding as before, we get

f(x,y, z)=/(l,l,l)*yz+/(l, 1,0)^(1 -z)+/(l,0, l)x(l-y)z + /(1, 0, 0)* (1 -y)

(lw*)+/(o, 1, 1) (1 -*)y + /(0, 1, 0) (1 - x)y (1 -z) + /(0, 0, 1) (1 - *) (1 -y)z +
                          Z

/(0,0,0)(l-*)(l-y)(l-*),

in which/(l, 1, 1) represents what the function f(x, y, z) hecomes when we

make therein m - 1, y = 1, * ■ 1, and so on for the rest.

11. It is now easy to see the general law which determines the expansion of

any proposed function, and to reduce the method of effecting the expansion

to a rule. But before proceeding to the expression of such a rule, it will be

convenient to premise the following observations :—Each form of expansion that we have obtained consists of certain terms,

into which the symbols x, y, &c. enter, multiplied by coefficients, into which

those symbols do not enter. Thus the expansion off(x) consists of two terms, x

and 1 - x, multiplied by the coefficients f(l) and^O) respectively. And the

expansion of f(x, y) consists of the four terms xy, x(l-y), (1 -x)y, and (1 -x), (1

- y), multiplied by the coefficients/(l, 1),/(1,0), f(0, 1), /(0, 0), respectively.

The terms x, 1 -x, in the former case, and the terms xy, a;(l - y), &c., in the

latter, we shall call the constituents of the expansion. It is evident that they

are in form independent of the form of the function to be expanded. Of the

constituent xy, x and y are termed the factors.

The general rule of development will therefore consist of two parts, the

first of which will relate to the formation of the constituents of the expansion,

the second to the determination of their respective coefficients. It is as

follows:

1st. To expand any function of the symbols x, y, z.—Form a series of

constituents in the following manner: Let the first constituent be the product

of the symbols; change in this product any symbol z into 1 - z, for the second

constituent. Then in both these change any other symbol y into 1 - y, for two

more constituents. Then in the four constituents thus obtained change any

other symbol x into 1 - x, for four new constituents, and so on until the

number of possible changes is exhausted.

  2ndly. To find the coefficient of any constituent.—If that constituent

involves a; as a factor, change in the original function x into 1; but if it

involves 1 - x as a factor, change in the original function x into 0. Apply the

same rule with reference to the symbols y, z, &c.: the final calculated value of

the function thus transformed will be the coefficient sought.

The sum of the constituents, multiplied each by its respective coefficient,

will be the expansion required.

12. It is worthy of observation, that a function may be developed with

reference to symbols which it does not explicitly contain. Thus if, proceeding

according to the rule, we seek to develop the function 1 - x, with reference to

the symbols x and y, we have,


    When x = 1 and y = 1 the given function = 0. 

      * = 1 „ y - 0 „ „ =0. x = 0 „ y = 1 „ „ = 1.

*- 0 „ y = 0 „ „ =1.

Whence the development is

1 - x = 0 xy + 0 x(\-y) + (l- x)y + (1 -a;) (1 -y); and this is a true

development. The addition of the terms (1 - x)y and (1 - x) (1 - y) produces

the function 1 - x.

The symbol 1 thus developed according to the rule, with respect to the

symbol x, gives

x + 1 - x. Developed with respect to x and y, it gives

xy + x{l-y) + (l-x)y + (1-z) (1 -y). Similarly developed with respect to any set

of symbols, it pro-< duces a series consisting of all possible constituents of

those symbols.

13. A few additional remarks concerning the nature of the general

expansions may with propriety be added. Let us take, for illustration, the

general theorem (5), which presents the type of development for functions of

two logical symbols'.

In the first place, that theorem is perfectly true and intelligible when x and

y are quantitative symbols of the species considered in this chapter, whatever

algebraic form may be assigned to the function f(x, y), and it may therefore be

intelligibly employed in any stage of the process of analysis intermediate

between the change of interpretation of the symbols from the logical to the

quantitative system above referred to, and the final restoration of the logical

interpretation.

  Secondly. The theorem is perfectly true and intelligible when x and y are

logical symbols, provided that the form of the function/(x, y) is such as to

represent a class or collection of things, in which case the second member is

always logically interpretable. For instance, iff (or, y) represent the function 1

- x + xy, we obtain on applying the theorem

1 -x + xy-xy+0 x(l-y) + (1 -x)y + (1 -a:) (1 -y), = xy + (l-x)y + (l-x) {l-y),

and this result is intelligible and true.

  Thus we may regard the theorem as true and intelligible for quantitative

symbols of the species above described, always; for logical symbols, ahoayswhen interpretable. Whensoever therefore it is employed in this work it must

be understood that the symbols x, y are quantitative and of the particular

species referred to, if the expansion obtained is not interpretable.

But though the expansion is not always immediately interpretable, it

always conducts us at once to results which are interpretable. Thus the

expression x-y gives on development the form

*(i -y)-yO-*),

which is not generally interpretable. We cannot take, in thought, from the

class of things which are x's and not ys, the class of things which are t/'s and

not x's, because the latter class is not contained in the former. But if the form

x-y presented itself as the first member of an equation, of which the second

member was 0, we should have on development

  *(l-y)-y(l-*)-0.

Now it will be shown in the next chapter that the above equation, x and y

being regarded as quantitative and of the species described, is resolvable at

once into the two equations

x(l-y) = 0, y(l-*)-0, and these equations are directly interpretable in Logic

when logical interpretations are assigned to the symbols x and y. And it may

be remarked, that though functions do not necessarily become interpretable

upon development, yet equations are always reducible by this process to

interpretable forms.

14. The following Proposition establishes some important properties of

constituents. In its enunciation the symbol t is employed to represent

indifferently any constituent of an expansion. Thus if the expansion is that of

a function of two symbols x and y, t represents any of the four forms xy, x(l -

y), (1 - x)y, and (1 - x) (1 -y). Where it is necessary to represent the

constituents of an expansion by single symbols, and yet to distinguish them

from each other, the distinction will be marked by suffixes. Thus ti might be

employed to represent xy, l to represent a; (1 -y), and so on.
                              2

  PROPOSITION III.

Any single constituent t of an expansion satisfies the law of duality whose

expression ist(l-t)=0.

The product of any two distinct constituents of an expansion is equal to 0,

and the sum of all the constituents is equal to 1.

1st. Consider the particular constituent xy. We have

          i
xy x xy - xyi.

      52
But a; = x, y = y, by the fundamental law of class symbols; hence

xy x xy = xy.

Or representing xy by t,

t*t = t, or t(l-t) = 0.

Similarly the constituent x (1 - y) satisfies the same law. For we have

xi = x, (l-y)t=l-y,

              s
.-. {x(l-y)) = a:(l-y), or t(l-t) = 0.

Now every factor of every constituent is either of the form x or of the form 1

- x. Hence the square of each factor is equal to that factor, and therefore the

square of the product of the factors, i. e. of the constituent, is equal to the

constituent; wherefore t representing any constituent, we have

*, = <, or t(l -t) = 0.

  2ndly. The product of any two constituents is 0. This is evident from the

general law of the symbols expressed by the equation x(l - x) = 0; for

whatever constituents in the same expansion we take, there will be at least

one factor x in the one, to which will correspond a factor 1 - x in the other.

3rdly. The sum of all the constituents of an expansion is unity. This is

evident from addition of the two constituents x and 1 - x, or of the four

constituents, xy, x(l - y), (1 - x) y, (1 - x) (1 - y). But it is also, and more

generally, proved by expanding 1 in terms of any set of symbols (V. 12). The

constituents in this case are formed as usual, and all the coefficients are unity.

15. With the above Proposition we may connect the following.

  PROPOSITION IV.

If V represent the sum of any series of constituents, the separatecoefficients of which are 1, then is the condition satisfied,

r(i-r) = o.


    Let It, t-i . . . t be the constituents in question, then 
                    n

             F= *, + *,... + *„. 


Squaring both sides, and observing that tf = t t t2 = 0, &c., we
                                                    ui

have

  J
F = 1 + t... + t;
        l2nwhence
Vo1

rQ-p)=0.

Therefore
  CHAPTER VI.

OF THE GENERAL INTERPRETATION OF LOGtCAL EQUATIONS,

AND THE RESULTING ANALYSIS OF PROPOSITIONS. ALSO, OF

THE CONDITION OF INTERPRETABILITY OF LOGICAL FUNCTIONS.

1. TT has been observed that the complete expansion of any -*- function by

the general rule demonstrated in the last chapter, involves two distinct sets of

elements, viz., the constituents of the expansion, and their coefficients. I

propose in the present chapter to inquire, first, into the interpretation of

constituents, and afterwards into the mode in which that interpretation is

modified by the coefficients with which they are connected.

The terms " logical equation," " logical function," &c., will be employed

generally to denote any equation or function involving the symbols x, y, &c.,

which may present itself either in the expression of a system of premises, or

in the train of symbolical results which intervenes between the premises and

the conclusion. If that function or equation is in a form not immediately

interpretable in Logic, the symbols x, y, &c., must be regarded as quantitative

symbols of the species described in previous chapters (II. 15), (V. 6), as

satisfying the law,

x (1 - x) = 0.

By the problem, then, of the interpretation of any such logical function or

equation, is meant the reduction of it to a form in which, when logical values

are assigned to the symbols x, y, &c., it shall become interpretable, together

with the resulting interpretation. These conventional definitions are in

accordance with the general principles for the conducting of the method of

this treatise, laid down in the previous chapter.

  PROPOSITION I.

2. The constituents of the expansion of any function of the logical symbols

x, y, Sfc, are interpretable, and represent the several exclusive divisions oflhe

universe of discourse, formed by the predication and denial in every possible

way of the qualities denoted by tlie symbols x, y, fyc.

For greater distinctness of conception, let it be supposed that the function

expanded involves two symbols x and y, with reference to which the

expansion has been effected. We have then the following constituents, viz.:xy, x (1 - y), (1 - x) y, (1 - x) (1 - y).

Of these it is evident, that the first xy represents that class of objects which at

the same time possess both the elementary qualities expressed by x and y, and

that the second x (1 - y) represents the class possessing the property x, but not

the property y. In like manner the third constituent represents the class of

objects which possess the property represented by y, but not that represented

by x; and the fourth constituent (1- x) (1 - y), represents that class of objects,

the members of which possess neither of the qualities in question.

  Thus the constituents in the case just considered represent all the four

classes of objects which can be described by affirmation and denial of the

properties expressed by x and y. Those classes are distinct from each other.

No member of one is a member of another, for each class possesses some

property or quality contrary to a property or quality possessed by any other

class. Again, these classes together make up the universe, for there is no

object which may not be described by the presence or the absence of a

proposed quality, and thus each individual thing in the universe may be

referred to some one or other of the four classes made by the possible

combination of the two given classes x and y, and their contraries.

The remarks which have here been made with reference to the constituents

of/ (x, y) are perfectly general in character. The constituents of any expansion

represent classes—those classes

G

are mutually distinct, through the possession of contrary qualities, and they

together make up the universe of discourse.

3. These properties of constituents have their expression in the theorems

demonstrated in the conclusion of the last chapter, and might thence have

been deduced. From the fact that every constituent satisfies the fundamental

law of the individual symbols, it might have been conjectured that each

constituent would represent a class. From the fact that the product of any two

constituents of an expansion vanishes, it might have been concluded that the

classes they represent are mutually exclusive. Lastly, from the fact that the

sum of the constituents of an expansion is unity, it might have been inferred,

that the classes which they represent, together make up the universe.

4. Upon the laws of constituents and the mode of their interpretation abovedetermined, are founded the analysis and the interpretation of logical

equations. That all such equations admit of interpretation by the theorem of

development has already been stated. I propose here to investigate the forms

of possible solution which thus present themselves in the conclusion of a

train of reasoning, and to show how those forms arise. Although, properly

speaking, they are but manifestations of a single fundamental type or

principle of expression, it will conduce to clearness of apprehension if the

minor varieties which they exhibit are presented separately to the mind.

The forms, which are three in number, are as follows:

  FORM I.

5. The form we shall first consider arises when any logical equation V- 0 is

developed, and the result, after resolution into its component equations, is to

be interpreted. The function is supposed to involve thelogical symbols

x,y,&c, in combinations which are not fractional. Fractional combinations

indeed only arise in the class of problems which will be considered when we

come to speak of the third of the forms of solution above referred to.


                 PROPOSITION II. 

         To interpret tlie logical equation V= 0. 

    For simplicity let us suppose that V involves but two sym- 


bols, x and y, and let us represent the development of the given equation by

axy+bx(l -y) + c(l -x)y+d(l -x)(l-y) = 0; (1)

a, b, c, and d being definite numerical constants.

Now, suppose that any coefficient, as a, does not vanish. Then multiplying

each side of the equation by the constituent xy, to which that coefficient is

attached, we have

axy = 0, whence, as a does not vanish,

tey-0, and this result is quite independent of the nature of the other

coefficients of the expansion. Its interpretation, on assigning to x and y their

logical significance, is "No individuals belonging at once to the class

represented by x, and the class represented by y, exist."

But if the coefficient a does vanish, the term axy does not appear in thedevelopment (1), and, therefore, the equation xy = 0 cannot thence be

deduced.

In like manner, if the coefficient b does not vanish, we have

x(l-y) = 0,

which admits of the interpretation, " There are no individuals which at the

same time belong to the class x, and do not belong to the class y."

  Either of the above interpretations may, however, as will subsequently be

shown, be exhibited in a different form.

The sum of the distinct interpretations thus obtained from the several terms

of the expansion whose coefficients do not vanish, will constitute the

complete interpretation of the equation V = 0. The analysis is essentially

independent of the number of logical symbols involved in the function V, and

the object of the proposition will, therefore, in all instances, be attained by the

following Rule:—

    RULE.—Develop the function V, and equate to 0 every constituent whose

coefficient does not vanish. The interpretation of these results collectively

will constitute the interpretation of the given equation.

6. Let us take as an example the definition of" clean beasts," laid down in

the Jewish law, viz., " Clean beasts are those which both divide the hoof and

chew the cud," and let us assume

x = clean beasts; y = beasts dividing the hoof; z = beasts chewing the cud.

Then the given proposition will be represented by the equation

x=yz, which we shall reduce to the form

x - yz = 0,

and seek that form of interpretation to which the present method leads. Fully

developing the first member, we have

0 xyz + xy (1 - z) + x (1 - y) z + x (1 - y) (1 - z) -(l-*)^+0(l-*)y(l-^)+0(l-*)(l-

y)«+0(l-*)(l-y)(l-*>

Whence the terms, whose coefficients do not vanish, give

xy(l-z) = 0, «(l-y) = 0, c(l-y)(l-*)-0, (l-*)y*=0.These equations express a denial of the existence of certain classes of objects,

viz.:

1st. Of beasts which are clean, and divide the hoof, but do not chew the

cud.

2nd. Of beasts which are clean, and chew the cud, but do not divide the

hoof.

3rd. Of beasts which are clean, and neither divide the hoof nor chew the

cud.

4th. Of beasts which divide the hoof, and chew the cud, and are not clean.

Now all these several denials are really involved in the original

proposition. And conversely, if these denials be granted, the original

proposition will follow as a necessary consequence. They are, in fact, the

separate elements of that proposition. Every primary proposition can thus be

resolved into a series of denials of the existence of certain defined classes of

things, and may, from that system of denials, be itself reconstructed. It might

here be asked, how it is possible to make an assertive proposition out of a

series of denials or negations? From what source is the positive element

derived? I answer, that the mind assumes the existence of a universe not a

priori as a fact independent of experience, but either a posteriori as a

deduction from experience, or hypothetically as a foundation of the

possibility of assertive reasoning. Thus from the Proposition, "There are no

men who are not fallible," which is a negation or denial of the existence of "

infallible men," it may be inferred either hypothetically, "All men (if men

exist) are fallible," or absolutely, (experience having assured us of the

existence of the race), "All men are fallible."

The form in which conclusions are exhibited by the method of this

Proposition may be termed the form of " Single or Conjoint Denial."

  FORM II.

7. As the previous form was derived from the development and

interpretation of an equation whose second member is 0, the present form,

which is supplementary to it, will be derived from the development and

interpretation of an equation whose second member is 1. It is, however,

readily suggested by the analysis of the previous Proposition.  Thus in the example last discussed we deduced from the equation

x - yz = 0

the conjoint denial of the existence of the classes represented by the

constituents

xy(l-z), xz(l-y), x(l -y) (1 -z), (l-x)yz,

whose coefficients were not equal to 0. It follows hence that the remaining

constituents represent classes which make up the universe. Hence we shall

have

zyz(l-x)y(l-z)  (l-x)(l-y)z+(l-x)(l-y)(l-z) = l.
  ++

This is equivalent to the affirmation that all existing things belong to some

one or other of the following classes, viz.:

1st. Clean beasts both dividing the hoof and chewing the cud.

2nd. Unclean beasts dividing the hoof, but not chewing the cud.

3rd. Unclean beasts chewing the cud, but not dividing the hoof.

4th. Things which are neither clean beasts, nor chewers of the cud, nor

dividers of the hoof.

This form of conclusion may be termed the form of " Single or Disjunctive

Affirmation,"—single when but one constituent appears in the final equation;

disjunctive when, as above, more constituents than one are there found.

Any equation, V= 0, wherein V satisfies the law of duality, may also be

made to yield this form of interpretation by reducing it to the form l- V=l, and

developing the first member. The case, however, is really included in the next

general form. Both the previous forms are of slight importance compared

with the following one.

  FORM III.

8. In the two preceding cases the functions to be developed were equated

to 0 and to 1 respectively. In the present case I shall suppose the

corresponding function equated to any logical symbol w. We are then to

endeavour to interpret the equation V = w, V being a function of the logical

symbols x, y, z, &c. In the first place, however, I deem it necessary to showhow the equation V=w, or, as it will usually present itself, w = V, arises.

Let us resume the definition of " clean beasts," employed in the previous

examples, viz., "Clean beasts are those which both divide the hoof and chew

the cud," and suppose it required to determine the relation in which "beasts

chewing the cud" stand to "clean beasts" and "beasts dividing the hoof." The

equation expressing the given proposition is

x = yz,

and our object will be accomplished if we can determine z as an interpretable

function of x and y.

Now treating x, y, z as symbols of quantity subject to a peculiar law, we

may deduce from the above equation, by solution, But this equation is not at

present in an interprctable form. If we can reduce it to such a form it will

furnish the relation required.E

On developing the second member of the above equation, we have

                1
* - *y + o * ( - y) + o (1 - *)y + Q (1 - x) (1 - y),

and it will be shown hereafter (Prop. 3) that this admits of the following

interpretation:

  "Beasts which chew the cud consist of all clean beasts (which also divide

the hoof), together with an indefinite remainder (some, none, or all) of

unclean beasts which do not divide the hoof."

9. Now the above is a particular example of a problem of the utmost

generality in Logic, and which may thus be stated:— "Given any logical

equation connecting the symbols x, y, z, TO, required an interpretable

expression for the relation of the class represented by TO to the classes

represented by the other symbols ar, r, z, &c."

The solution of this problem consists in all cases in determining, from the

equation given, the expression of the above symbol TO, in terms of the other

symbols, and rendering that expression interpretable by development. Now

the equation given is always of the first degree with respect to each of the

symbols involved. The required expression for TO can therefore always be

found. In fact, if we develop the given equation, whatever its firm may be

with respect to w, we obtain an equation of theform

Ew + E'(l -TO) = 0, (1)

E anl E' being functions of the remaining symbols. From the

abovi we have

  E=(E-E) TO. Tlerefore

            2
* = E^E <>

anl expanding the second member by the rule of development, it wll only

remain to interpret the result in logic by the next proposition.



If the fraction -=—= has common factors in its numerator

Mi — J<,

and denominator, we are not permitted to reject them, unless they are mere

numerical constants. For the symbols x, y, &c., regarded as quantitative, may

admit of such values 0 and 1 as to cause the common factors to become equal

to 0, in which case the algebraic rule of reduction fails. This is the case

contemplated in our remarks on the failure of the algebraic axiom of division

(II. 14). To express the solution in the form (2), and without attempting to

perform any unauthorized reductions, tc interpret the result by the theorem of

development, is a course strictly in accordance with the general principles of

this treatise. If the relation of the class expressed by 1 - w to the othtr classes,

x,y, &c . is required, we deduce from (1), in like manner

as above,

E









 
 
to the interpretation of which also the method of the followhg Proposition is

applicable:  PROPOSITION III.

10. To determine the interpretation of any logical equatiai of the form

w=V, in which w is a class symbol, and V afunctiaiof other class symbols

quite unlimited in its form.

Let the second member of the above equation be fullj expanded. Each

coefficient of the result will belong to some one of the four classes, which,

with their respective interpretatons, we proceed to discuss.

1st. Let the coefficient be 1. As this is the symbol o'the universe, and as the

product of any two class symbols repreents those individuals which are found

in both classes, any constitwnt which has unity for its coefficient must be

interpreted withoit limitation, i. e. the whole of the class which it represents is

implied.

2nd. Let the coefficient be 0. As in Logic, equally wih Arithmetic, this is

the symbol of Nothing, no part of the clas

represented by the constituent to which it is prefixed must be taken.

3rd. Let the coefficient be of the form rr. Now, as in Arithmetic, the

symbol - represents an indefinite number, except when

otherwise determined by some special circumstance, analogy would suggest

that in the system of this work the same symbol should represent an indefinite

class. That this is its true meaning will be made clear from the following

example:

Let us take the Proposition, "Men not mortal do not exist;" represent this

Proposition by symbols; and seek, in obedience to the laws to which those

symbols have been proved to be subject, a reverse definition of " mortal

beings," in terms of " men."

Now if we represent "men" by y, and "mortal beings" by x, the Proposition,

"Men who are not mortals do not exist," will be expressed by the equation

y(l-a-) = 0,

from which we are to seek the value of z. Now the above equation gives

y - yx = 0, or yx = y.

Were this an ordinary algebraic equation, we should, in the next place, divideboth sides of it by y. But it has been remarked in Chap. II. that the operation of

division cannot he performed with the symbols with which we are now

engaged. Our resource, then, is to express the operation, and develop the

result by the method of the preceding chapter. We have, then, first,

y

and, expanding the second member as directed,

* = y + o( -*)

This implies that mortals (x) consist of all men (y), together with such a

remainder of beings which are not men (1 - y), as

will be indicated by the coefficient -. Now let us inquire what remainder of

"not men" is implied by the premiss. It might happen that the remainder

included all the beings who are not men, or it might include only some of

them, and not others, or it might include none, and any one of these

assumptions would be in perfect accordance with our premiss. In other

words, whether those beings which are not men are all, or some, or none, of

them mortal, the truth of the premiss which virtually asserts that all men are

mortal, will be equally unaffected, and therefore the

expression - here indicates that all, some, or none of the class to

whose expression it is affixed must be taken.

  Although the above determination of the significance of the

symbol - is founded only upon the examination of a particular

case, yet the principle involved in the demonstration is general, and there are

no circumstances under which the symbol can present itself to which the

same mode of analysis is inapplicable.

We may properly term - an indefinite class symbol, and may, if

convenience should require, replace it by an uncompounded symbol v,

subject to the fundamental law, v (1 - ») = 0.

4th. It may happen that the coefficient of a constituent in an expansion

does not belong to any of the previous cases. To ascertain its true

interpretation when this happens, it will be necessary to premise the

following theorem:11. THEOREM.—If a Junction V, intended to represent any

class or collection of objects, w, be expanded, and if the numerical

coefficient, a, of any constituent in its development, do not satisfy

the law.

a(l-a)-0,

then the constituent in question must be made equal to 0.

To prove the theorem generally, let us represent the expansion given, under

the form

w = ati + n,t. + a,t + &c., (1)
    x2

in which t t, t„ &c. represent the constituents, and o a, a, &c.
          u2u22

the coefficients; let us also suppose that a and a do not satisfy
                                                x,

the law

a, (1 - a,) = 0, a (1 - a) = 0;
                22

but that the other coefficients are subject to the law in question, so that we

have

a,* = a,, &c.

Now multiply each side of the equation (1) by itself. The result will be

w = a,* <i + a," <, + &c. (2)

This is evident from the fact that it must represent the development of the

equation

w= V*,

but it may also be proved by actually squaring (1), and observing that we

have

by the properties of constituents. Now subtracting (2) from (1),

we have

        2'
(a, - ai) ti + (a, - a) t = 0.
                      ,2Or, a (1 - a^ tx + a, (1 - a) t = 0.
    x22

Multiply the last equation by <,; then since ^ t = 0, we have
                                                    i

a, (1 - ai) t = 0, whence <i = 0. In like manner multiplying the same equation
          t

by t,, we have

a (1 - a) t = 0, whence t^ = 0.
22i

  Thus it may be shown generally that any constituent whose coefficient is

not subject to the same fundamental law as the symbols themselves must be

separately equated to 0. The usual

form under which such coefficients occur is -. This is the algebraic symbol of

infinity. Now the nearer any number approaches to infinity (allowing such an

expression), the more does it depart from the condition of satisfying the

fundamental law above referred to.

The symbol -, whose interpretation was previously discussed, does not

necessarily disobey the law we are here considering, for it admits of the

numerical values 0 and 1 indifferently. Ite actual interpretation, however, as

an indefinite class symbol, cannot, I conceive, except upon the ground of

analogy, be deduced from its arithmetical properties, but must be established

experimentally.

12. We may now collect the results to which we have been led, into the

following summary:

1st. The symbol 1, as the coefficient of a term in a development, indicates

that the whole of the class which that constituent represents, is to be taken.

2nd. The coefficient 0 indicates that none of the class are to be taken.

3rd. The symbol - indicates that a perfectly indefinite portion of the class, i.

e. some, none, or all of its members are to be taken.

4th. Any other symbol as a coefficient indicates that the constituent to

which it is prefixed must be equated to 0.

It follows hence that if the solution of a problem, obtained by

development, be of the form

that solution may be resolved into the two following equations, viz.,                                                                        w = A + vC, (3)

                                                                                D = 0, (4)

v being an indefinite class symbol. The interpretation of (3) shows what

elements enter, or may enter, into the composition of w, the class of things

whose definition is required; and the interpretation of (4) shows what

relations exist among the elements of the original problem, in perfect

independence of w.

  Such are the canons of interpretation. It may be added, that they are

universal in their application, and that their use is always unembarrassed by

exception or failure.

13. Corollary.—If f be an independently interpretable logical function, it

will satisfy the symbolical law, V(l - V) = 0.

By an independently interpretable logical function, I mean one which is

interpretable, without presupposing any relation among the things represented

by the symbols which it involves. Thus x(l - y) is independently interpretable,

but x-y is not so. The latter function presupposes, as a condition of its

interpretation, that the class represented by y is wholly contained in the class

represented by x; the former function does not imply any such requirement.

Now if V is independently interpretable, and if w represent the collection of

individuals which it contains, the equation w = V will hold true without

entailing as a consequence the vanishing of any of the constituents in the

development of V; since such vanishing of constituents would imply relations

among the classes of things denoted by the symbols in V. Hence the

development of V will be of the form

fli t\ + o2 ti + &cthe coefficients a a„ &c. all satisfying the condition a, (1 -
                                        u

cti) - 0, a (1 - a) = 0, &c.
        22

Hence by the reasoning of Prop. 4, Chap. V. the function V will

be subject to the law

F(l - V) = 0.

This result, though evident a priori from the fact that V is supposed to

represent a class or collection of things, is thus seen to follow also from the

properties of the constituents of which it is composed. The condition V(l - V)= 0 may be termed "the condition of interpretability of logical functions."

14. The general form of solutions, or logical conclusions developed in the

last Proposition, may be designated as a " Bclation between terms." I use, as

before, the word " terms" to denote the parts of a proposition, whether simple

or complex, which are connected by the copula " is" or " are." The classes of

things represented by the individual symbols may be called the elements of

the proposition.

15. EX. 1.—Resuming the definition of " clean beasts," (VI.6), required a

description of " unclean beasts."

Here, as before, x standing for "clean beasts," y for "beasts dividing the

hoof," z for " beasts chewing the cud," we have

x = yz; (5)

whence

1 - x =1 -yz;

and developing the second member,

l-«-jr(l-«) + *(l-y) + (l-y)(l-s);

which is interpretable into the following Proposition: Unclean beasts are all

which divide the hoof without chewing the cud, all which chew the cud

without dividing the hoof, and all which neither divide the hoof nor chew the

cud.

EX. 2.—The same definition being given, required a description of beasts

which do not divide the hoof.

  From the equation x = yz we have

x therefore, , z - x

W = —;

and developing the second member,

1 - y = 0 xz + -rr- x (1 - *) + (1 - *) z + = (1 - a) (1 - *).

Here, according to the Rule, the term whose coefficients is -jr-, must be

separately equated to 0, whence we have1 - y ■„ (1 - *) z + v (1 - x) (1 - z),

x(l-z) = 0',

whereof the first equation gives by interpretation the Proposition: Beasts

which do not divide the hoof consist of all unclean beasts which chew the

cud, and an indefinite remainder (some, none, or all) of unclean beasts which

do not chew the cud.

The second equation gives the Proposition: There are no clean beasts

which do not chew the cud. This is one of the independent relations above

referred to. We sought the direct relation of "Beasts not dividing the hoof," to

"Clean beasts and beasts which chew the cud." It happens, however, that

independently of any relation to beasts not dividing the hoof, there exists, in

virtue of the premiss, a separate relation between clean beasts and beasts

which chew the cud. This relation is also necessarily given by the process.

EX. 3.—Let us take the following definition, viz.: " Responsible beings are

all rational beings who are either free to act, or have voluntarily sacrificed

their freedom," and apply to it the preceding analysis.

Let x stand for responsible beings. y „ rational beings. z „ those who are

free to act, w „ those who have voluntarily sacrificed their freedom of action.

In the expression of this definition I shall assume, that the two alternatives

which it presents, viz.: "Rational beings free to act," and " Rational beings

whose freedom of action has been voluntarily sacrificed," are mutually

exclusive, so that no individuals are found at once in both these divisions.

This will permit us to interpret the proposition literally into the language of

symbols, as follows:

x = yz + yw. (6)

Let us first determine hence the relation of "rational beings" to responsible

beings, beings free to act, and beings whose freedom of action has been

voluntarily abjured. Perhaps this object will be better stated by saying, that

we desire to express the relation among the elements of the premiss in such a

form as will enable ns to determine how far rationality may be inferred from

responsibility, freedom of action, a voluntary sacrifice of freedom, and their

contraries.

  From (6) we have                                            x

and developing the second member, but rejecting terms whose coefficients

are 0,

y- — xzw + xz{\ - w) + x(l -z) w + -x (I -z) (\ - u>)


                                                                  + jj(i-*)(i-*)(i-«0,

whence, equating to 0 the terms whose coefficients are - and -, we have

y = xz (1 - ID) + xrc (l - z) + v (1 - x)(l- z)(l - to); (7)

xzw = 0; (8) *(l-e)(l-w)-0; (9)

whence by interpretation—

  DIRECT CONCLUSION.—Rational beings are all responsible beings who are either

free to act, not having voluntarily sacrificed their freedom, or not free to act,

having voluntarily sacrificed their freedom, together with an indefinite

remainder {some, none, or all) of beings not responsible, not free, and not

having voluntarily sacrificed tlieir freedom.

FIRST INDEPENDENT RELATION.—No responsible beings are at the same time free to act,

and in the condition of having voluntarily sacrificed their freedom.

  SECOND.—No responsible beings are not free to act, and at Oie same time in

the condition of not having sacrificed their freedom.

The independent relations above determined may, however, be put in

another and more convenient form. Thus (8) gives

xw = - = 0 z + - (1 - z), on development;

or, xw = v (1 - c); (10)

and in like manner (9) gives

  *(!_„,)- _JL-°* 0(l-*);

or, x (1 - to) = vz; (11)

and (10) and (11) interpreted give the following Propositions:

1st. Responsible beings who have voluntarily sacrificed their freedom are

not free.2nd. Responsible beings who have not voluntarily sacrificed their freedom

are free.

These, however, are merely different forms of the relations before

determined.

16. In examining these results, the reader must bear in mind, that the sole

province of a method of inference or analysis, is to determine those relations

which are necessitated by the connexion of the terms in the original

proposition. Accordingly, in estimating the completeness with which this

object is effected, we have nothing whatever to do with those other relations

which may be suggested to our minds by tbe meaning of the terms employed,

as distinct from their expressed connexion. Thus it seems obvious to remark,

that "They who have voluntarily sacrificed their freedom are not free," this

being a relation implied in the very meaning of the terms. And hence it might

appear, that the first of the two independent relations assigned by the method

is on the one hand needlessly limited, and on the other hand superfluous.

However, if regard be had merely to the connexion of the terms in the

original premiss, it will be seen that the relation in question is not liable to

either of these charges. The solution, as expressed in the direct conclusion

and the independent relations, conjointly, is perfectly complete, without

being in any way superfluous.

If we wish to take into account the implicit relation above referred to, viz.,

" They who have voluntarily sacrificed their freedom are not free," we can do

so by making this a distinct proposition, the proper expression of which

would be

io - * (1 - z).

This equation we should have to employ together with that expressive of

the original premiss. The mode in which such an examination must be

conducted will appear when we enter upon the theory of systems of

propositions in a future chapter. The sole difference of result to which the

analysis leads is, that the first of the independent relations deduced above is

superseded.

17. EX.4.—Assuming the same definition as in Example 2, let it be

required to obtain a description of irrational persons.

"We havel-y=l














£t w
zw-z

 

Trw

:;zzuwO:z(!-u)»Oz(l—z)w—%z(l—z)(;—!v)

*(lfr)zw+(l~x)z(l-w)1(l-a:)(l-z)uwg(lfz)(l-z)(l—w)

=(1-2)zw+ (1-2)2(1- 1)+ (1-2)(1- 2)wsv(1-z)(1-2)(1-1)
~(l-z)z4(1-2)(1-)w+v(l-2) (1-2)(1-w),

with 220 =0, z(1-2)(1-w)=0.
%
The independent relations here given are the same as we before arrived at,

as they evidently ought to be, since whatever relations prevail independently

of the existence of a given class of objects y, prevail independently also of the

existence of the contrary class 1 - y.

The direct solution afforded by the first equation is:—Irrational persons

consist of all irresponsible beings who are either free to act, or have

voluntarily sacrificed their liberty, and are not free to act; together with an

indefinite remainder of irresponsible beings who have not sacrificed their

liberty, and .are not free to act.

18. The propositions analyzed in this chapter have been of that species

called definitions. I have discussed none of which the second or predicate

term is particular, and of which the general type is Y = vX, Y and X being

functions of the logical symbols x, y, z, &c., and v an indefinite class symbol.

The analysis of such propositions is greatly facilitated (though the step is not

an essential one) by the elimination of the symbol v, and this process depends

upon the method of the next chapter. I postpone also the consideration of

another important problem necessary to complete the theory of single

propositions, but of which the analysis really depends upon the method of the

reduction of systems of propositions to be developed in a future page of this

work.  CHAPTER VII.



ON ELIMINATION.



I. TN the examples discussed in the last chapter, all the ele.*- ments of the

original premiss re-appeared in the conclusion, only in a different order, and

with a different connexion. But it more usually happens in common

reasoning, and especially when we have more than one premiss, that some of

the elements are required not to appear in the conclusion. Such elements, or,

as they are commonly called, "middle terms," may be considered as

introduced into the original propositions only for the sake of that connexion

which they assist to establish among the other elements, which are alone

designed to enter into the expression of the conclusion.

2. Respecting such intermediate elements, or middle terms, some

erroneous notions prevail. It is a general opinion, to which, however, the

examples contained in the last chapter furnish a contradiction, that inference

consists peculiarly in the elimination of such terms, and that the elementary

type of this process is exhibited in the elimination of one middle term from

two premises, so as to produce a single resulting conclusion into which that

term does not enter. Hence it is commonly held, that syllogism is the basis, or

else the common type, of all inference, which may thus, however complex its

form and structure, be resolved into a series of syllogisms. The propriety of

this view will be considered in a subsequent chapter. At present I wish to

direct attention to an important, but hitherto unnoticed, point of difference

between the system of Logic, as expressed by symbols, and that of common

algebra, with reference to the subject of elimination. In the algebraic system

we are able to eliminate one symbol from two equations, two symbols from

three equations, and generally n - 1 symbols from n equations. There thus

exists a definite connexion between the number of independent equations

given, and the number of symbols of quantity which it is possible to eliminate

from them. But it is otherwise with the system of Lope. No fixed connexion

there prevails between the number of equations given representing

propositions or premises, and the number of typical symbols of which the

elimination can be effected. From a single equation an indefinite number of

such symbols may be eliminated. On the other hand, from an indefinitenumber of equations, a single class symbol only may be eliminated. We may

affirm, that in this peculiar system, the problem of elimination is resolvable

under all circumstances alike. This is a consequence of that remarkable law

of duality to which the symbols of Logic are subject. To the equations

furnished by the premises given, there is added another equation or system of

equations drawn from the fundamental laws of thought itself, and supplying

the necessary means for the solution of the problem in question. Of the many

consequences which flow from the law of duality, this is perhaps the most

deserving of attention.

3. As in Algebra it often happens, that the elimination of symbols from a

given system of equations conducts to a mere identity in the form 0 = 0, no

independent relations connecting the symbols which remain; so in the system

of Logic, a like result, admitting of a similar interpretation, may present itself.

Such a circumstance does not detract from the generality of the principle

before stated. The object of the method upon which we are about to enter is

to eliminate any number of symbols from any number of logical equations,

and to exhibit in the result the actual relations which remain. Now it may be,

that no such residual relations exist. In such a case the truth of the method is

shown by its leading us to a merely identical proposition.

4. The notation adopted in the following Propositions is similar to that of

the lqst chapter. By f (x) is meant any expression involving the logical

symbol x, with or without other logical symbols. By /(l) is meant what f(x)

becomes when x is therein changed into 1; by /(0) what the same function

becomes when x is changed into 0.

  PROPOSITION I.

5. Iff(x) =0 be any logical equation involving the class symbol x, with or

without other class symbols, then wiU the equation

  /(l)/(0)=0

be true, independently of the interpretation of x; and it will be the complete

result of the elimination of x from the above equation.

In other words, the elimination of x from any given equation, f(x)=0, will

be effected by successively changing in that equation x into 1, and x into 0,

and multiplying the two resulting equations together.  Similarly the complete result of the elimination of any class symbols, x, y,

8fc,from any equation of the form V= 0, will be obtained by completely

expanding the first member of that equation in constituents of the given

symbols, and multiplying together all tlie coefficients of those constituents,

and equating the product to 0.

  Developing the first member of the equation /(#) - 0, we have (V. 10),

  /(l)*+/(0)(l-*)-0;

or, l/(l)-/(0)}*+/(0)-0. (1)



  /(o)-/(i)'

                                        /(0)-/0)"

Substitute these expressions for x and 1 - x in the fundamental equation

x (1 - x) = 0,



and there results







 
  {/(0)-/0))'

  /(l)/(0) = 0, (2)

the form required.

6. It is seen in this process, that the elimination is really effected between

the given equation f(x) = 0 and the universally true equation x (1 - x) = 0,

expressing the fundamental law of logical symbols, qua logical. There exists,

therefore, no need of more than one premiss or equation, in order to render

possible the elimination of a term, the necessary law of thought virtually

supplying the other premiss or equation. And though the demonstration of

this conclusion may be exhibited in other forms, yet the same element

furnished by the mind itself will still be virtually present. Thus we mightproceed as follows: Multiply (1) by a;, and we have

                                                                              /(l)*-0, (3)

and let us seek by the forms of ordinary algebra to eliminate x from this

equation and (1).

Now if we have two algebraic equations of the form

ax + b = 0, a'x + b'=0;

it is well known that the result of the elimination of x is

                                                                        ab'-a'b = 0. \ (4)

\ But comparing the above pair of equations with (1) and (3)

respectively, we find


    «=/(0-/(0), W(0); 

    a' = /(l) 6'=0; 


which, substituted in (4), give

  /(l)/(0)-0,

as before. In this form of the demonstration, the fundamental equation x(l - x)

= 0, makes its appearance in the derivation of (3) from (1).

7. I shall add yet another form of the demonstration, partaking of a half

logical character, and which may set the demonstration of this important

theorem in a clearer light.

We have as before

  /(l)*/(0)(l-*) = 0. Multiply this equation first by x, and secondly by 1 - x,
      +

we get

/(1)* = 0, /(0)(l-*) = 0. From these we have by solution and development,


    /(l) = - - - (1 - x), on development, 

      x 0 


The direct interpretation of these equations is—

1st. Whatever individuals arc included in the class represented by/(l), arenot a;'s.

2nd. Whatever individuals are included in the class represented by/(0), are

X'S.

  Whence by common logic, there are no individuals at once in the class /(l)

and in the class /(0), i.e. there are no individuals in theclass/(l)/(0). Hence,

  /(l)/(0) = 0. (5)

Or it would suffice to multiply together the developed equations, whence

the result would immediately follow.

8. The theorem (5) furnishes us with the following Rule:

TO ELIMINATE ANT SYMBOL FROM A PROPOSEn EQUATION.

  RULE.— The terms of the equation having been brought, by transposition if

necessary, to the first side, give to the symbol successively the values 1 and 0,

and multiply the resulting equations together.

The first part of the Proposition is now proved.

9. Consider in the next place the general equation

  /(*,*/) = 0;

the first member of which represents any function of x, y, and other symbols.

By what has been shown, the result of the elimination of y from this

equation will be

/(*, l)/>, 0)=0;

for such is the form to which we are conducted by successively changing in

the given equation y into 1, and y into 0, and multiplying the results together.

  Again, if in the result obtained we change successively x into 1, and x into

0, and multiply the results together, we have

    /(l,l)/(l,0)/(0,l)/(0,0) = 0; (6)

as the final result of elimination.

But the four factors of the first member of this equation are the four

coefficients of the complete expansion of f(x, y), the first member of the

original equation; whence the second part of the Proposition is manifest.  EXAMPLES.

10. EX. 1.—Having given the Proposition, "All men are mortal," and its

symbolical expression, in the equation,

yvx,

in which y represents "men," and x "mortals," it is required to eliminate the

indefinite class symbol v, and to interpret the result.

Here bringing the terms to the first side, we have

y - vx = 0. When v = 1 this becomes

                                                                                  y-* = 0;

and when v = 0 it becomes

y=0;

and these two equations multiplied together, give

y - yx = o,

or y(l-a:) = 0,

                          2
it being observed that y = y.

The above equation is the required result of elimination, and its

interpretation is, Men who are not mortal do not exist,—an obvious

conclusion.

If from the equation last obtained we seek a description of beings who are

not mortal, we have

y

.'. 1 - x = -.

y

Whence, by expansion, l-x = -(l-y), which interpreted gives, They who are

not mortal are not men. This is an example of -what in the common logic is

called conversion by contraposition, or negative conversion.*

EX. 2.—Taking the Proposition, "No men are perfect," as represented by

the equationy = »(1 -x), wherein y represents "men," and x "perfect beings," it is required

to eliminate v, and find from the result a description both of perfect beings

and of imperfect beings. We have

y - v (1 - x) - 0. Whence, by the rule of elimination,

  {y-(l-*)}xy-o, or y-y(l-*)-0,

or yx = 0;

-which is interpreted by the Proposition, Perfect men do not exist. From the

above equation we have

x = - = -(l-y)by development;

-whence, by interpretation, No perfect beings are men. Similarly,

which, on interpretation, gives, Imperfect beings are all men with an

indefinite remainder of beings, which are not men.

11.-It will generally be the most convenient course, in the treatment of

propositions, to eliminate first the indefinite class symbol v, wherever it

occurs in the corresponding equations. This will only modify their form,

without impairing their significance. Let us apply this process to one of the

examples of Chap. iV. For the Proposition, "No men are placed in exalted

stations and free from envious regards," we found the expression

y-v(l-xz), and for the equivalent Proposition, "Men in exalted stations are not

free from envious regards," the expression yx = v(l- z);

        'Whately's Logic, Book II. chap. II. sec. 4.

and it was observed that these equations, » being an indefinite

class symbol, were themselves equivalent. To prove this, it is

only necessary to eliminate from each the symbol v. The first

equation is

y - v (1 - xz) - 0,

whence, first making v = 1, and then v = 0, and multiplying the results, we

have

(y-1 +xz)y = 0,or yxz = 0.

Now the second of the given equations becomes on transposition

yx - e(l - z) = 0; whence (j/x - 1 + z) yx = 0,

or yxz = 0,

as before. The reader will easily interpret the result.

12. EX. 3.—As a subject for the general method of this chapter, we will

resume Mr. Senior's definition of wealth, viz.: "Wealth consists of things

transferable, limited in supply, and either productive of pleasure or preventive

of pain." We shall consider this definition, agreeably to a former remark, as

including all things which possess at once both the qualities expressed in the

last part of the definition, upon which assumption we have, as our

representative equation,

w = st {pr + />(1 - r) + r(l - p)},

or JO = st{p + r(l -p)},

wherein

w stands for wealth.

s „ things limited in supply.

                              t „ things transferable.

p „ things productive of pleasure.

r „ things preventive of pain.

  From the above equation we can eliminate any symbols that we do not

desire to take into account, and express the result by solution and

development, according to any proposed arrangement of subject and

predicate.

Let us first consider what the expression for w, wealth, would be if the

element r, referring to prevention of pain, were eliminated. Now bringing the

terms of the equation to the first side,

we get

w - st (/> + r - rp) = 0.Making r = 1, the first member becomes w - st, and making r = 0 it becomes

w - stp; whence we have by the Rule,

(w - st) (w - stp) = 0, (7)

or to — wstp - wst + stp = 0; (8)

whence stp

  r
w - 



                                      st + stp - 1'

the development of the second member of which equation gives

0









stp + = 8t (1 -p).] )
Whence we have the conclusion,— Wealth consists of all things limited in

supply, transferable, and productive of pleasure, and an indefinite remainder

of things limited in supply, transferable, and not productive of pleasure. This

is sufficiently obvious.

Let it be remarked that it is not necessary to perform the multiplication

indicated in (7), and reduce that equation to the form (8), in order to

determine the expression of w in termB of the other symbols. The process of

development may in all cases be made to supersede that of multiplication.

Thus if we develop (7) in terms of w, we find

(1 - st) (1 - sip) w + stp (1 - w) = 0,

whence stp

W
 ~ stp - (1 - st) (1 - stp)'

and this equation developed will give, as before,

w = stp + - 8t(l -p).13. Suppose next that we seek a description of things limited in supply, as

dependent upon their relation to wealth, transferableness, and tendency to

produce pleasure, omitting all reference to the prevention of pain.

  From equation (8), which is the result of the elimination of r from the

original equation, we have

w — s (wt + wtp - tp) = 0;

whence w

                                          s =






wt + wip - Ip
= wtp + wt (1 -p) + - w (1 - t)p + - w (1 - t) (1 - p) + 0(1 -w)tp + jj(l - u>) t (1

- p) +1(1 - •) (1 - t)p


                                                                                  + JJ(1-«,)(1-0(1-P).

We will first give the direct interpretation of the above solution, term by

term; afterwards we shall offer some general remarks which it suggests; and,

finally, show how the expression of the conclusion may be somewhat

abbreviated.

First, then, the direct interpretation is, Things limited in supply consist of

AH wealth transferable and productive of pleasure —all wealth transferable,

and not productive of pleasure,—an indefinite amount of what is not wealth,

but is either transferable, and not productive of pleasure, or intransferable

and productive of pleasure, or neither transferable nor productive of

pleasure.

To which the terms whose coefficients are - permit us to add the following

independent relations, viz.:

1st. Wealth that is intransferable, and productive of pleasure, does not

exist.

  2ndly. Wealth that is intransferable, and not productive of pleasure, does

not exist.

14. Respecting this solution I suppose the following remarks are likely tobe made.

First, it may be said, that in the expression above obtained for" things

limited in supply," the term "All wealth transferable," &c., is in part

redundant; since all wealth is (as implied in the original proposition, and

directly asserted in the independent relations') necessarily transferable.

I answer, that although in ordinary speech we should not deem it necessary

to add to "wealth" the epithet" transferable," if another part of our reasoning

had led us to express the conclusion, that there is no wealth which is not

transferable, yet it pertains to the perfection of this method that it in all cases

fully defines the objects represented by each term of the conclusion, by

stating the relation they bear to each quality or element of distinction that we

have chosen to employ. This is necessary in order to keep the different parts

of the solution really distinct and independent, and actually prevents

redundancy. Suppose that the pair of terms we have been considering had not

contained the word " transferable," and had unitedly been "All wealth," we

could then logically resolve the single term "All wealth" into the two terms

"All wealth transferable," and "All wealth in transferable." But the latter term

is shown to disappear by the "independent relations." Hence it forms no part

of the description required, and is therefore redundant. The remaining term

agrees with the conclusion actually obtained.

  Solutions in which there cannot, by logical divisions, be produced any

superfluous or redundant terms, may be termed pure solutions. Such are all

the solutions obtained by the method of development and elimination above

explained. It is proper to notice, that if the common algebraic method of

elimination were adopted in the cases in which that method is possible in the

present system, we should not be able to depend upon the purity of the

solutions obtained. Its want of generality would not be its only defect.

15. In the second place, it will be remarked, that the conclusion contains

two terms, the aggregate significance of which would be more conveniently

expressed by a single term. Instead of " All wealth productive of pleasure,

and transferable," and "All wealth not productive of pleasure, and

transferable," we might simply say, "All wealth transferable." This remark is

quite just. But it must be noticed that whenever any such simplifications are

possible, they are immediately suggested by the form of the equation we have

to interpret; and if that equation be reduced to its simplest form, then theinterpretation to which it conducts will be in its simplest form also. Thus in

the original solution the terms wtp and wt(l - p), which have unity for their

coefficient, give, on addition, wt; the terms w (I -t) p and to (1 - <) (1- p),

which have - for their coefficient give to( 1 - i); and the terms (1 - w) (1 - i)p

and (1 - to) (1 -t) (1 -p), which have jr for their coefficient, give (1 - to) (1 -

*). Whence the complete solution issure are, all wealth not preventive of

pain, an indefinite amount of wealth that is preventive of pain, and an

indefinite amount of what is not wealth.

* --«* + £(1 - to) (1 - 0 + 3 (1 - «)< (1 -P), with the independent relation,

w (1 - <) = 0, or w = -1.

The interpretation would now stand thus:—

1st. Things limited in supply consist of all wealth transferable, with an

indefinite remainder of what is not wealth and not transferable, and of

transferable articles which are not wealth, and are not productive of

pleasure.

2nd. All wealth is transferable.

This is the simplest form under which the general conclusion, with its

attendant condition, can be put.

16. When it is required to eliminate two or more symbols from a proposed

equation we can either employ (6) Prop. I., or eliminate them in succession,

the order of the process being indifferent. From the equation

w = st (p + r - pr),

we have eliminated r, and found the result,

to - wst - wstp + stp = 0.

Suppose that it had been required to eliminate both r and t, then taking the

above as the first step of the process, it remains to eliminate from the last

equation t. Now when t = 1 the first member of that equation becomes

w - ws - wsp + sp, and when t = 0 the same member becomes to. Whence we

have

w (w - ws - wsp + sp) = 0, or to - ws = 0,

for the required result of elimination.If from the last result we determine w, we have

0 0

w = = - s,

1 - * 0

whence "All wealth is limited in supply" As p does not enter into the

equation, it is evident that the above is true, irrespectively of any relation

which the elements of the conclusion bear to the quality "productive of

pleasure."

  Resuming the original equation, let it be required to eliminate s and t. We

have

w = st (p + r - pr).

Instead, however, of separately eliminating * and t according to the Rule, it

will suffice to treat st as a single symbol, seeing that it satisfies the

fundamental law of the symbols by the equation

st (1 - st) = 0.

Placing, therefore, the given equation under the form

w - st (p + r - pr) = 0;

and making st successively equal to 1 and to 0, and taking the product of the

results, we have

(w - p - r + pr) w = 0,

or to - wp - wr + wpr = 0,

for the result sought.

As a particular illustration, let it be required to deduce an expression for

"things productive of pleasure" (p), in terms of "wealth" (to), and "things

preventive of pain" (r).

We have, on solving the equation,mes =l

7
PEe-n

B
)

=gmw-<|,r>+5(\»w>r+ﬁ(l—w)(lfr)

 

cw(-n) s s S -

Whence the following conclusion i— Things productive of plea-

 
  From the same equation we get

V
 w(l-r) w(l-r)'

which developed, gives

wr
( ~P) = Q m + o ( i ~ "0 * o 0 ~ )' ( -)

Whence, Things not productive of pleasure are either wealth, preventive of

pain, or what is not wealth.

  Equally easy would be the discussion of any similar case.

17. In the last example of elimination, we have eliminated the compound

symbol st from the given equation, by treating it as a single symbol. The

same method is applicable to any combination of symbols which satisfies the

fundamental law of individual symbols. Thus the expression p + r - pr will,

on being multiplied by itself, reproduce itself, so that if we represent p + r-pr

by a single symbol as y, we shall have the fundamental law obeyed, the

equation

y = y\ or y (1 - y) - 0,

being satisfied. For the rule of elimination for symbols is founded upon the

supposition that each individual symbol is subject to that law; and hence the

elimination of any function or combination of such symbols from an

equation, may be effected by a single operation, whenever that law is

satisfied by the function.

  Though the forms of interpretation adopted in this and the previous chapter

show, perhaps better than any others, the direct significance of the symbols 1

and -, modes of expression

more agreeable to those of common discourse may, with equal truth and

propriety, be employed. Thus the equation (9) may be interpreted in the

following manner: Wealth is eitlier limited in supply, transferable, andproductive of pleasure, or limited in sup

ply, transferable, and not productive of pleasure. And reversely, Whatever is

limited in supply, transferable, and productive of pleasure, is wealth. Reverse

interpretations, similar to the above, are always furnished when the final

development introduces terms having unity as a coefficient.

18. NOTE.—The fundamental equation /(l)/(0) = 0, expressing the result of

the elimination of the symbol x from any equation f(x) = 0, admits of a

remarkable interpretation.

It is to be remembered, that by the equation/(x) = 0 is implied some

proposition in which the individuals represented by the class x, suppose

"men," are referred to, together, it may be, with other individuals; and it is

our object to ascertain whether there is implied in the proposition any relation

among the other individuals, independently of those found in the class men.

Now the equation /(l) = 0 expresses what the original proposition would

become if men made up the universe, and the equation y (0) = 0 expresses

what that original proposition would become if men ceased to exist,

wherefore the equation/(l)/(0) = 0 expresses what in virtue of the original

proposition would be equally true on either assumption, i. e. equally true

whether "men" were "all things" or "nothing." Wherefore the theorem

expresses that what is equally true, whether a given class of objects embraces

the whole universe or disappears from existence, is independent of that class

altogether, and vice versa. Herein we see another example of the

interpretation of formal results, immediately deduced from the mathematical

laws of thought, into general axioms of philosophy. 
  CHAPTER VIII.

ON THE REDUCTION OF 8TSTEMS OF PROPOSITIONS.

1. TN the preceding chapters we have determined sufficiently -*- for the

most essential purposes the theory of single primary propositions, or, to speak

more accurately, of primary propositions expressed by a single equation. And

we have established upon that theory an adequate method. We have shown

how any element involved in the given system of equations may be

eliminated, and the relation which connects the remaining elements deduced

in any proposed form, whether of denial, of affirmation, or of the more usual

relation of subject and predicate. It remains that we proceed to the

consideration of systems of propositions, and institute with respect to them a

similar series of investigations. We are to inquire whether it is possible from

the equations by which a system of propositions is expressed to eliminate, ad

libitum, any number of the symbols involved; to deduce by interpretation of

the result the whole of the relations implied among the remaining symbols;

and to determine in particular the expression of any single element, or of any

interpretable combination of elements, in terms of the other elements, so as to

present the conclusion in any admissible form that may be required. These

questions will be answered by showing that it is possible to reduce any

system of equations, or any of the equations involved in a system, to an

equivalent single equation, to which the methods of the previous chapters

may be immediately applied. It will be seen also, that in this reduction is

involved an important extension of the theory of single propositions, which in

the previous discussion of the subject we were compelled to forego. This

circumstance is not peculiar in its nature. There arc many special departments

of science which cannot be completely surveyed from within, but require to

be studied also from an external point of view, and to be regarded in

connexion with

other and kindred subjects, in order that their full proportions may be

understood.

This chapter will exhibit two distinct modes of reducing systems of

equations to equivalent single equations. The first of these rests upon the

employment of arbitrary constant multipliers. It is a method sufficiently

simple in theory, but it has the inconvenience of rendering the subsequent

processes of elimination and development, when they occur, somewhattedious. It was, however, the method of reduction first discovered, and partly

on this account, and partly on account of its simplicity, it has been thought

proper to retain it. The second method does not require the introduction of

arbitrary constants, and is in nearly all respects preferable to the preceding

one. It will, therefore, generally be adopted in the subsequent investigations

of this work.

2. We proceed to the consideration of the first method.

  PROPOSITION I.

Any system of logical equations may be reduced to a single equivalent

equation, by multiplying each equation after the first by a distinct arbitrary

constant quantity, and adding all the results, including the first equation,

together.

By Prop. 2, Chap. vI., the interpretation of any single equation, f(x, y..) .= 0

is obtained by equating to 0 those constituents of the development of the first

member, whose coefficients do not vanish. And hence, if there be given two

equations, f(x,y..) = 0, and F(x, y..) = 0, their united import will be contained

in the system of results formed by equating to 0 all those constituents which

thus present themselves in both, or in either, of the given equations developed

according to the Rule of Chap. vi. Thus let it be supposed, that we have the

two equations

xy-2x = 0, (1)

x - y = 0; (2)

The development of the first gives

  -ay-3*(l-y)-0;

whence, xy = 0, x (1 - y) = 0. (3) The development of the second equation

gives

* ( i - y) - y O - *) - 0 J

whence, x (1 - y) = 0, y (1 - x) = 0. (4)

The constituents whose coefficients do not vanish in both developments are

xy, x (1 - y), and (1 - x) y, and these would together give the system

xy = Q, X(1-JO = 0, (l-a;)y = 0; (5)which is equivalent to the two systems given by the developments separately,

seeing that in those systems the equation x (1 - y) = 0 is repeated. Confining

ourselves to the case of binary systems of equations, it remains then to

determine a single equation, which on development shall yield the same

constituents with coefficients which do not vanish, as the given equations

produce. Now if we represent by

the given equations, V and F, being functions of the logical symbols a:, y, z,
                        t

&c.; then the single equation

                                                                          r  cF, = 0, (6)
                                                                            i+

c being an arbitrary constant quantity, will accomplish the required object.

For let At represent any term in the full development V, wherein t is a

constituent and A its numerical coefficient, and let Bt represent the

corresponding term in the full development of P,, then will the corresponding

term in the development of (6) be

(A + cB) t.

The coefficient of t vanishes if A and B both vanish, but not otherwise. For if

we assume that A and B do not both vanish, and at the same time make

                                                                          A + cB = 0, (7)

the following cases alone can present themselves.

1st. That A vanishes and B does not vanish. In this case the above equation

becomes

and requires that c = 0. But this contradicts the hypothesis that c is an

arbitrary constant.

2nd. That B vanishes and A does not vanish. This assumption reduces (7)

to

4 = 0,

by which the assumption is itself violated.

3rd. That neither A nor B vanishes. The equation (7) then gives

-A

which is a definite value, and, therefore, conflicts with the hypothesis that c isarbitrary.

  Hence the coefficient A + cB vanishes when A and B both vanish, but not

otherwise. Therefore, the same constituents will appear in the development of

(6), with coefficients which do not vanish, as in the equations V =0, V = 0,
                                                                          x2

singly or together. And the equation F, + c V = 0, will be equivalent to the
                                                    2

system V = 0, V = 0.
        x2

By similar reasoning it appears, that the general system of equations

V, = 0, v. 0, V = 0, &c.;
          2s

may be replaced by the single equation

V + cV + e'V, + &c. = 0,
  x2

c, c, &c., being arbitrary constants. The equation thus formed may be treated

in all respects as the ordinary logical equations of the previous chapters. The

arbitrary constants c,, c, &c., are not logical symbols. They do not satisfy the
                          2

law,

c, (1 - d) = 0, c, (1 - c) - 0.
                        2

But their introduction is justified by that general principle which has been

stated in (II. 15) and (V. 6), and exemplified in nearly all our subsequent

investigations, viz., that equations involving the symbols of Logic may be

treated in all respects as if those symbols were symbols of quantity, subject to

the special law x (1 - x) = 0, until in the final stage of solution they assume a

form interpretable in that system of thought with which Logic is conversant.

3. The following example will serve to illustrate the above method.

EX. 1.—Suppose that an analysis of the properties of a particular class of

substances has led to the following general conclusions, viz.:

1st. That wherever the properties A and B are combined, either the property

C, or the property D, is present also; but they are not jointly present.

2nd. That wherever the properties B and C are combined, the properties A

and D are either both present with them, or both absent.

3rd. That wherever the properties A and B are both absent, the properties C

and D are both absent also; and vice versa, where the properties C and D areboth absent, A and B are both absent also.

Let it then be required from the above to determine what may be concluded

in any particular instance from the presence of the property A with respect to

the presence or absence of the properties B and C, paying no regard to the

property D.


    Represent the property A by x; 

   „ the property B by y; 

    „ the property C by z; 

   „ the property D by to. 


Then the symbolical expression of the premises will be


    xy - v {w (1 - z) + z (1 - to)); 

    yz~v {xw + (1- x) (1- to)}; 

      (l-*)(l-y)-(l-z)(l-»). 


.From the first two of these equations, separately eliminating the indefinite

class symbol v, we have


    xy {1 -to(l -z)-z (1 -to)} = 0; 

    yz {1 - xw - (1 - x)(l - w)) - 0. 


Now if we observe that by development

1 - w (1 - z) - z (1 - to) = wz + (1 - w) (1 - z), and

1 - xw - (1 - x) ( 1 - w) = x (1 - to) + w (1 - x),

and in these expressions replace, for simplicity,

1 - x by x, 1 - y by y, &c.,

we shall have from the three last equations,

xy (wz + wz) = 0; (1)

yz (xw + xw) = 0; (2)

xy=~bz; (3)

and from this system we must eliminate w.  Multiplying the second of the above equations by c, and the third by d, and

adding the results to the first, we have

xy (wz + wz) + cyz (xw + xw) + c'(xy -idx) = 0.

When w is made equal to 1, and therefore w to 0, the first member of the

above equation becomes

xyz + cxyz + dxy.

And when in the same member w is made 0 and id - 1, it becomes

xyz + cxyz + dxy - dz.

Hence the result of the elimination of to may be expressed in the form

  (xyz + cxyz + cxy) (xyz + cxyz + c'xy - cz) = 0; (4)

and from this equation x is to be determined.

  Were we now to proceed as in former instances, we should multiply

together the factors in the first member of the above equation; but it may be

well to show that such a course is not at all necessary. Let us develop the first

member of (4) with reference to a;, the symbol whose expression is sought,

we find

yz (yz + cyz - cz) x + (cyz + c'y) (c'y - c"z) (1 - x) = 0; or, cyzx + (cyz + c'y)

(c'y - cz) (1 - x) = 0;

whence we find,


    m (<ff* + c'y) (c'y - dz) 
    =
 (cyz + c'y) (dy - dz) - cyz' 


and developing the second member with respect to y and z,

0 _ C2 . 0 .

x
 = 0yz + -yz + ^yz + -yz; *-(l-y)*+|jy(l-*) + |j(l-y)(l-*);

the interpretation of which is, Wherever the property A is present, there

either C is present and B absent, or C is absent. And inversely, Wherever the

property C is present, and the property B absent, there the property A is

present.  These results may be much more readily obtained by the method next to be

explained. It is, however, satisfactory to possess different modes, serving for

mutual verification, of arriving at the same conclusion.

4. We proceed to the second method.

  PROPOSITION II.

If any equations, F, =0, V - 0, fyc, are such that the developments of their
                                2

first members consist only of constituents with positive coefficients, those

equations may be combined together into a single equivalent equation by

addition.

  For, as before, let At represent any term in the development of the function

V Bt the corresponding term in the development of V, and so on. Then will
u2

the corresponding term in the development of the equation

                                                                  V  V, + &c. = 0, (1)
                                                                    i+

formed by the addition of the several given equations, be

(A + B + &c.) t.

But as by hypothesis the coefficients A, B, &c. are none of them negative, the

aggregate coefficient A + B, &c. in the derived equation will only vanish

when the separate coefficients A, B, &c. vanish together. Hence the same

constituents will appear in the development of the equation (1) as in the

several equations V = 0, V = 0, &c. of the original system taken collectively,
                    i2

and therefore the interpretation of the equation (1) will be equivalent to the

collective interpretations of the several equations from which it is derived.



  PROPOSITION III.

5. If V = 0, V = 0, fyc represent any system of equations, the terms of
        l2

which have by transposition been brotight to Hie first side, then the combined

interpretation of the system will be involved in Hie single equation,

v? + v, + 8f. = o,
      2C

formed by adding together the squares of the given equations.

For let any equation of the system, as V = 0, produce on development an
                                                lequation

ati + at + &c. = 0,
l22

in which f„ t„ &c. are constituents, and a o„ &c. their corresponding
                                                u

coefficients. Then the equation Vf = 0 will produce on development an

equation

fli'fi + <*Jt + &c. - 0,
            2

as may be proved either from the law of the development or by squaring the

function ati + at„ &C- in subjection to the conditions
          l2

  <i2-<u <,*-<• tl = 0,
                  t2

assigned in Prop. 3, Chap. V. Hence the constituents which appear in the

expansion of the equation Vf = 0, are the same with those which appear in the

expansion of the equation F, = 0, and they have positive coefficients. And the

same remark applies to the equations V = 0, &c. Whence, by the last
                                            2

Proposition, the equation

Vf + Vj> + &c. = 0

will be equivalent in interpretation to the Bystem of equations

7, = 0, V = 0, &c.
          2

  Corollary.—Any equation, V= 0, of which the first member already

satisfies the condition

P- V, or V(l- V) = 0,

docs not need (as it would remain unaffected by) the process of squaring.

Such equations are, indeed, immediately developable into a series of

constituents, with coefficients equal to 1, Chap. V. Prop. 4.

  PROPOSITION IV.

6. Whenever the equations of a system have by the above process of

squaring, or by any other process, been reduced to a form such that all the

constituents exhibited in their development have positive coefficients, any

derived equations obtained by elimination will possess the same character,

and may be combined with the other equations by addition.

  Suppose that we have to eliminate a symbol x from any equation V= 0,which is such that none of the constituents, in the full development of its first

member, have negative coefficients. That expansion may be written in the

form

V + Po (1 - a;) - 0,
  lx

Vl and V being each of the form
        0

aji + at.. + a„t„,
      22

in which tl t 2 • • t are constituents of the other symbols, and ai a.. a„ in
                    n2

each case positive or vanishing quantities. The result of elimination is

and as the coefficients in V and F are none of them negative, there can be no
                              l2

negative coefficients in the product Vi V. Hence the equation V F = 0 may be
                                              tl2

added to any other equation, the coefficients of whose constituents are

positive, and the resulting equation will combine the full significance of those

from which it was obtained.

  PROPOSITION V.

7. To deduce from the previous Propositions a practical rule or method for

the reduction of systems of equations expressing propositions in Logic

We have by the previous investigations established the following points,

viz.:

1st. That any equations which are of the form V=0, V satisfying the

fundamental law of duality F(l - V) = 0, may be combined together by simple

addition.

  2ndly. That any other equations of the form V= 0 may be reduced, by the

process of squaring, to a form in which the same principle of combination by

mere addition is applicable.

It remains then only to determine what equations in the actual expression

of propositions belong to the former, and what to the latter, class.

Now the general types of propositions have been set forth in the conclusion

of Chap. iV. The division of propositions which they represent is as follows:

1st. Propositions, of which the subject is universal, and the predicate

particular.The symbolical type (IV. 15) is

X = vY,

X and Y satisfying the law of duality. Eliminating v, we have

  X(1-Y) = 0, (1)

and this will be found also to satisfy the same law. No further reduction by

the process of squaring is needed.

2nd. Propositions of which both terms are universal, and of which the

symbolical type is

X = Y,

X and Y separately satisfying the law of duality. Writing the equation in the

form X - Y = 0, and squaring, we have

  X-2XY+ y=o, or X(l- Y)+ Y(1-X) = 0. (2)

The first member of this equation satisfies the law of duality, as

is evident from its very form.

We may arrive at the same equation in a different manner.

The equation

X= Y

is equivalent to the two equations

X = vY, Y=vX,

(for to affirm that X's are identical with Fs is to affirm both that All X's are

Fs, and that All Fs are X's). Now these equations give, on elimination of v,

  X(1-F) = 0, F(1-X) = 0,

which added, produce (2).

3rd. Propositions of which both terms are particular. The form of such

propositions is

vX = vY,

but v is not quite arbitrary, and therefore must not be eliminated. For v is therepresentative of some, which, though it may include in its meaning all, does

not include none. We must therefore transpose the second member to the first

side, and square the resulting equation according to the rule. The result will

obviously be

wX(l - F) + «F(1-X) = 0.

The above conclusions it may be convenient to embody in a Rule, which

will serve for constant future direction.

8. RULE.— The equations being so expressed as that Vie terms X and Yin tlie

following typical forms obey the law of duality, change tlie equations

X =vYintoX(l- F) = 0, X= YintoX(l- Y) + F(1-X) = 0. vX~vYintovX(l- y) +

»Y(l-X) = 0. Any equation which is given in the form X = 0 will not need

transformation, and any equation which presents itself in the form X = 1 may

be replaced by 1 - X = 0, as appears from tlie second of the above

transformations.

  When the equations of the system have thus been reduced, any of them, as

well as any equations derived from them by the process of elimination, may

be combined by addition.

9. NOTE.—It has been seen in Chapter iV. that in literally translating the

terms of a proposition, without attending to its real meaning, into the

language of symbols, we may produce equations in which the terms X and Y

do not obey the law of duality. The equation w = st (p + r), given in (3) Prop.

3 of the chapter referred to, is of this kind. Such equations, however, as it has

been seen, have a meaning. Should it, for curiosity, or for any other motive,

be determined to employ them, it will be best to reduce them by the liule (VI.

5).

10. EX. 2.—Let us take the following Propositions of Elementary

Geometry:

1st. Similar figures consist of all whose corresponding angles are equal,

and whose corresponding sides are proportional.

2nd. Triangles whose corresponding angles are equal have their

corresponding sides proportional, and vice vend. To represent these premises,

let us make s - similar. t = triangles.    q = having corresponding angles equal. 

    r - having corresponding sides proportional. 


Then the premises are expressed by the following equations:

* = <r, (1)

tq=tr. (2)

Reducing by the Rule, or, which amounts to the same thing, bringing the

terms of these equations to the first side, squaring each equation, and then

adding, we have

s + qr - 2qrs + tq + tr - 2tqr = 0. (3)

Let it be required to deduce a description of dissimilar figures formed out of

the elements expressed by the terms, triangles, having corresponding angles

equal, having corresponding sides proportional.

We have from (3),

                    S=
tq + qr + rt - 2tqr   ~ 2^-1'

        y+9r1(4)
  ..-1-'■"V-i*~- 

And fully developing the second member, we find

\ -s = 0tqr + 2tq(l -r) + 2tr(l -q) + t(l-q) (1-r)

+ 0 (1 - 0 qr + (1 - 0 q (1 - r) + (1 - /) r (1 - q)

+ 0-00-9)0-0- (5)

In the above development two of the terras have the coefficient 2, these must

be equated to 0 by the Rule, then those terms whose coefficients are 0 being

rejected, we have

1 -,=<(1 -q) (l-r) + (l-0g(l-r) + (l - t)r (1 - y)

                                                                    + (l-0(l-?)O-r); (6)

                                                                            <?(l-r)-0; (7)

                                                                          tr(l-q) = 0; (8)

the direct interpretation of which is1st. Dissimilar figures consist of all triangles which havenottlieir

corresponding angles equal and sides proportional, and of all figures not

being triangles which have either their angles equal, and sides not

proportional, or their corresponding sides proportional, and angles not

equal, or neither their corresponding angles equal nor corresponding sides

proportional.

2nd. There are no triangles whose corresponding angles are equal, and

sides not proportional.

3rd. There are no triangles whose corresponding sides are proportional

and angles not equal.

11. Such are the immediate interpretations of the final equation. It is seen,

in accordance with the general theory, that in deducing a description of a

particular class of objects, viz., dissimilar figures, in terms of certain other

elements of the original premises, we obtain also the independent relations

which exist among those elements in virtue of the same premises. And that

this is not superfluous information, even as respects the immediate object of

inquiry, may easily be shown. For example, the independent relations may

always be made use of to reduce, if it be thought desirable, to a briefer form,

the expression of that relation which is directly sought. Thus if we .write (7)

in the form

0 = ty(l-r),

and add it to (6), we get, since

t(l-q)(l-r)  tq(l-r)-t(l-r),
          +

1 - * = <(1 - r) + (1 - t)q (1 - r) + (1 - 0r (1 - q)

    (l-l)(l-y)(l-r), which, on interpretation, would give for the first term of the

  description of dissimilar figures, "Triangles whose corresponding sides are

    not proportional," instead of the fuller description originally obtained. A

regard to convenience must always determine the propriety of such reduction.

12. A reduction which is always advantageous (VII. 15) consists in

collecting the terms of the immediate description sought, as of the second

member of (5) or (6), into as few groups as possible. Thus the third and

fourth terms of the second member of (6) produce by addition the single term

(1 - t) (1 - g). If this reduction be combined with the last, we have1 - •- <(1 - r) + (1 - t)q (1 -r) + (1 -t) (1 - q),

the interpretation of which is

  Dissimilar figures consist of all triangles whose corresponding sides are

not proportional, and all figures not being triangles which have either their

corresponding angles unequal, or their corresponding angles equal, but sides

not proportional.

The fulness of the general solution is therefore not a superfluity. While it

gives us all the information that we seek, it provides us also with the means

of expressing that information in the mode that is most advantageous.

13. Another observation, illustrative of a principle which has already been

stated, remains to be made. Two of the terms in the full development of 1 - s

in (5) have 2 for their coefficients,

instead of -. It will hereafter be shown that this circumstance

indicates that the two premises were not independent. To verify this, let us

resume the equations of the premises in their reduced forms, viz.,

* (1 - or) + qr (1 - s) = 0,

tq (1 - r) + tr (1 - q) = 0.

Now if the first members of these equations have any common constituents,

they will appear on multiplying the equations together. If we do this we

obtain

stq(l - r) + str(l - </) = 0.

Whence there will result

stq (1 - r) = 0, str (1 - q) = 0,

these being equations which are deducible from either of the primitive ones.

Their interpretations are—

  Similar triangles which have their corresponding angles equal have their

corresponding sides proportional.

  Similar triangles which have their corresponding sides proportional have

their corresponding angles equal.

And these conclusions are equally deducible from either premiss singly. Inthis respect, according to the definitions laid down, the premises are not

independent.

14. Let us, in conclusion, resume the problem discussed in illustration of

the first method of this chapter, and endeavour to ascertain, by the present

method, what may be concluded from the presence of the property C, with

reference to the properties A and B.

We found on eliminating the symbols v the following equations, viz.:

                                                                  xy [wz + wz) = 0, (1)

                                                                  yz (aw + xw) = 0, (2)

                                                                              xy - wz. (3)

From these we are to eliminate w and determine z. Now (1) and (2) already

satisfy the condition V(l - V) = 0. The third equation gives, on bringing the

terms to the first side, and squaring

xy (I - l>z) + w~z(l - xy) = 0. (4)

Adding (1) (2) and (4) together, we have

xy (wz + wz) + yz (xw + x) + xy(l- wz) + wz (1 - xy) = 0. Eliminating w, we

get

  (xyz + yzx + wy) {xyz + yzx + xyz + z(l - xy)) = 0.

Now, on multiplying the terms in the second factor by those in the first

successively, observing that

xx = 0, yy = 0, z~z = 0,

nearly all disappear, and we have only left

xyz + xyz = 0; (5)





0
whence T

 
0 - 0_ _. = 0*y + - xy + - xy + Oxy
        A

0 . 0_

furnishing the interpretation. Wherever the property Cis found, either theproperty A or the property B will be found icith it, but not both of them

together.

  From the equation (5) we may readily deduce the result arrived at in the

previous investigation by the method of arbitrary constant multipliers, as well

as any other proposed forms of the relation between x, y, and z; e. g. If the

property B is absent, either A and C will be jointly present, or Cwill be

absent. And conversely, If A and C are jointly present, B will be absent. The

converse part of this conclusion is founded on the presence of a term xz with

unity for its coefficient in the developed value ofy.  CHAPTER IX.

ON CERTAIN METHODS OF ABBREVIATION.

r
1.  I "'HOUGH the three fundamental methods of development, .*-

elimination, and reduction, established and illustrated in the previous

chapters, are sufficient for all the practical ends of Logic, yet there are certain

cases in which they admit, and especially the method of elimination, of being

simplified in an important degree; and to these I wish to direct attention in the

present chapter. I shall first demonstrate some propositions in which the

principles of the above methods of abbreviation are contained, and I shall

afterwards apply them to particular examples.

Let us designate as class terms any terms which satisfy the fundamental

law V (L - V) = 0. Such terms will individually be constituents; but, when

occurring together, will not, as do the terms of a development, necessarily

involve the same symbols in each. Thus ax + bxy + cyz may be described as

an expression consisting of three class terms, x, xy, and yz, multiplied by the

coefficients a, b, c respectively. The principle applied in the two following

Propositions, and which, in some instances, greatly abbreviates the process of

elimination, is that of the rejection of superfluous class terms; those being

regarded as superfluous which do not add to the constituents of the final

result.

  PROPOSITION I.

2. From any equation, V= 0, in which V consists of a series of class terms

having positive coefficients, we are permitted to reject any term which

contains another term as a factor, and to change every positive coefficient to

unity.

For the significance of this series of positive terms depends only upon the

number and nature of the constituents of its final expansion, i. e. of its

expansion with reference to all the symbols which it involves, and not at all

upon the actual values of the coefficients (VI. 5). Now let x be any term of

the series, and xy any other term having 1 as a factor. The expansion of x with

reference to the symbols x and y will be

xy + x (1 - y),

and the expansion of the sum of the terms x and xy will be2xy + x (1 - y).

But by what has been said, these expressions occurring in the first member

of an equation, of which the second member is 0, and of which all the

coefficients of the first member are positive, are equivalent; since there must

exist simply the two constituents xy and x (1 - y) in the final expansion,

whence will simply arise the resulting equations

xy = 0, x (1 - y) = 0.

And, therefore, the aggregate of terms x + xy may be replaced by the single

term x.

The same reasoning applies to all the cases contemplated in the

Proposition. Thus, if the term x is repeated, the aggregate 2x may be replaced

by x, because under the circumstances the equation x = 0 must appear in the

final reduction.

  PROPOSITION II.

3. Whenever in the process of elimination we have to multiply together two

factors, each consisting solely of positive terms, satisfying the fundamental

law of logical symbols, it is permitted to reject from both factors any common

term, or from either factor any term which is divisible by a term in the oilier

factor; provided always, that tlie rejected term be added to the product of the

resulting factors.

In the enunciation of this Proposition, the word "divisible" is a term of

convenience, used in the algebraic sense, in which xy and x (I - y) are said to

be divisible by x.

To render more clear the import of this Proposition, let it be supposed that

the factors to be multiplied together are x + y + z and x + yw + t. It is then

asserted, that from these two factors we may reject the term x, and that from

the second factor we may reject the term yw, provided that these terms be

transferred to the final product. Thus, the resulting factors being y + z

and t, if to their product yt + zt we add the terms x and yw,

we have

x + yw + yt + zt,

as an expression equivalent to the product of the given factors x + y + z and x+ yw + t; equivalent namely in the process of elimination.

Let us consider, first, the case in which the two factors have a common

term x, and let us represent the factors by the expressions x + P, x + Q,

supposing P in the one case and Q in the other to be the sum of the positive

terms additional to x.

Now,

(x + P)(x + Q) = x + xP + xQ + PQ. (1)

But the process of elimination consists in multiplying certain factors together,

and equating the result to 0. Either then the second member of the above

equation is to be equated to 0, or it is a factor of some expression which is to

be equated to 0.

If the former alternative be taken, then, by the last Proposition, we are

permitted to reject the terms xP andxQ, inasmuch as they are positive terms

having another term x as a factor. The resulting expression is

x + PQ, which is what we should obtain by rejecting x from both factors, and

adding it to the product of the factors which remain.

  Taking the second alternative, the only mode in which the second member

of (1) can affect the final result of elimination must depend upon the number

and nature of its constituents, both which elements are unaffected by the

rejection of the terms xP and x Q. For that development of a; includes all

possible constituents of which x is a factor.

  Consider finally the case in which one of the factors contains a term, as xy,

divisible by a term, x, in the other factor.

Let x + P and xy + Q be the factors. Now

(x + P) (xy + Q) = xy + xQ + xyP + PQ.

But by the reasoning of the last Proposition, the term xyP may be rejected as

containing another positive term xy as a factor, whence we have


  xy + xQ + PQ 

    = xy+(x + P)Q. 


But this expresses the rejection of the term xy from the second factor, and itstransference to the final product. Wherefore the Proposition is manifest.

  PROPOSITION III.

4. If the any symbol which is retained in the final result of the elimination

of any other symbols from any system of equations, the result of such

elimination may be expressed in tlieform

  Et+E(l-t) = 0, iu which E is formed by makiny in the proposed system t =

1, and eliminating the same other symbols; and E' by making in the proposed

system t = 0, and eliminating the same other symbols.

For let $ (t) = 0 represent the final result of elimination. Expanding this

equation, we have

0 (1) t + <p (0) (1 - t) = 0. Now by whatever process we deduce the

function <f, (t) from the proposed system of equations, by the same process

should we deduce 0 (1), if in those equations t were changed into 1; and by

the same process should we deduce <j, (0), if in the same equations t were

changed into 0. Whence the truth of the proposition is manifest.

5. Of the three propositions last proved, it may be remarked, that though

quite unessential to the strict development or application of the general

theory, they yet accomplish important ends of a practical nature. By Prop. 1

we can simplify the results of addition; by Prop. 2 we can simplify those of

multiplication; and by Prop. 3 we can break up any tedious process of

elimination into two distinct processes, which will in general be of a much

less complex character. This method will be very frequently adopted, when

the final object of inquiry is the determination of the value of t, in terms of

the other symbols which remain after the elimination is performed.

6. EX. 1.—Aristotle, in the Nicomachean Ethics, Book n. Cap. 3, having

determined that actions are virtuous, not as possessing in themselves a certain

character, but as implying a certain condition of mind in him who performs

them, viz., that he perform them knowingly, and with deliberate preference,

and for their own sakes, and upon fixed principles of conduct, proceeds in the

two following chapters to consider the question, whether virtue is to be

referred to the genus of Passions, or Faculties, or Habits, together with some

other connected points. He grounds his investigation upon the following

premises, from which, also, he deduces the general doctrine and definition of

moral virtue, of which the remainder of the treatise forms an exposition.  PREMISES.

1. Virtue is either a passion (irdOos), or a faculty (Suva/utc), or a habit (?

Stc).

2. Passions are not things according to which we are praised or blamed, or

in which we exercise deliberate preference.

3. Faculties are not things according to which we are praised or blamed,

and which are accompanied by deliberate preference.

4. Virtue is something according to which we are praised or blamed, and

which is accompanied by deliberate preference.

5. Whatever art or science makes its work to be in a good state avoids

extremes, and keeps the mean in view relative to human nature (TO filaov ...

wpbg rifjiag).

6. Virtue is more exact and excellent than any art or science. This is an

argument d fortiori. If science and true art shun

defect and extravagance alike, much more does virtue pursue the undeviating

line of moderation. If they cause their work to be in a good state, much more

reason have to we to say that Virtue causeth her peculiar work to be "in a

good state." Let the final premiss be thus interpreted. Let us also pretermit all

reference to praise or blame, since the mention of these in the premises

accompanies only the mention of deliberate preference, and this is an element

which we purpose to retain. We may then assume as our representative

symbols—

v = virtue.

p = passions.

/ = faculties.

h = habits.

d = things accompanied by deliberate preference.


    g = things causing their work to be in a good state. 

    m= things keeping the mean in view relative to human 

        nature. Using, then, q as an indefinite class symbol, our premises will be expressed

by the following equations:

» - 9 I/K1 -f) (1 - h) +/(1 -p) (1 -h) + h (1 -p) (1 -/)}.

p=(l-rf).

  /-j(l-rf).

» = yrf.

5'= ?to• v = qg.

And separately eliminating from these the symbols q,

    »{I-PO-/)(I-A)-/(I-JP)0-A)-*(I-P)(I-/)-O.(I)

j?d = 0. (2)

ya = o. . (3)

v(l-d) = 0. (4)

g(l-m) = 0. (5)

  »(l-y) = 0. (6)

We shall first eliminate from (2), (3), and (4) the symbol d, and then

determine » in relation to p, f, and h. Now the addition of (2), (3), and (4)

gives

  (p+/)d + »(l-d) = 0.

From which, eliminating d in the ordinary way, we find

  (p+/)t>-0. (7)

Adding this to (1), and determining v, we find

0

v
  -fi-(i-f)(i-k)-f(i-p)(i-h)-h(i-f)(i-y
p++PP

Whence by development,

  »-SS*(W)(i-w

The interpretation of this equation is: Virtue is a habit, and not a faculty or a

passion.Next, we will eliminate/, p, and g from the original system of equations,

and then determine v in relation to A, d, and m. "We will in this case

eliminate p and / together. On addition of (1), (2), and (3), we get

  v{l-p(l-f)(l-h)-/(l-p)(l-h)-h(l-p)(l-f))

                                                                          + pd + fd = 0.

Developing this with reference to p and /, we have

(v + 2d)pf + (vh + d)p(l-f)+ (vh + d) (l-p)f


                                                                      + o(l-A)(l-p)(l-/)-0.

Whence the result of elimination will be

(v + 2d) (vh + d) (vh + d)v(l - h) = 0.

Now v + 2d=v + d+d, which by Prop. I. is reducible to v + d. The product of

this and the second factor is

(v + d) (vh + d),

which by Prop. II. reduces to

d + v (vh~) or vh + d.

In like manner, this result, multiplied by the third factor, gives nimply vh + d.

Lastly, this multiplied by the fourth factor, v (I - A), gives, as the final

equation,

                                                                        vd(l - h) = 0. (8)

It remains to eliminate g from (5) and (6). The result is

                                                                          »(l-m) = 0. (9)

Finally, the equations (4), (8), and (9) give on addition

»(1 - d) + vd(l -h) + e(l -m) - 0,

from which we have

0

v=
  1 -d + d(l -A) + l-m'

And the development of this result givesv = j: hdm, f which the interpretation is,— Virtue is a habit accompanied by

deliberate preference, and keeping in view the mean relative to human

nature.

  Properly speaking, this is not a definition, but a description of virtue. It is

all, however, that can be correctly inferred from the premises. Aristotle

specially connects with it the necessity of prudence, to determine the safe and

middle line of action; and there is no doubt that the ancient theories of virtue

generally partook more of an intellectual character than those (the theory of

utility excepted) which have most prevailed in modern days. Virtue was

regarded as consisting in the right state and habit of the whole mind, rather

than in the single supremacy of conscience or the moral faculty. And to some

extent those theories were undoubtedly right. For though unqualified

obedience to the dictates of conscience is an essential element of virtuous

conduct, yet the conformity of those dictates with those unchanging

principles of rectitude (alwvia SiWa) which are founded in, or which rather

are themselves the foundation of the constitution of things, is another

element. And generally this conformity, in any high degree at least, is

inconsistent with a state of ignorance and mental hebetude. Reverting to the

particular theory of Aristotle, it will probably appear to most that it is of too

negative a character, and that the shunning of extremes does not afford a

sufficient scope for the expenditure of the nobler energies of our being.

Aristotle seems to have been imperfectly conscious of this defect of his

system, when in the opening of his seventh book he spoke of an "heroic

virtue"* rising above the measure of human nature.

7. I have already remarked (VIII. 1) that the theory of single equations or

propositions comprehends questions which cannot be fully answered, except

in connexion with the theory of systems of equations. This remark is

exemplified when it is proposed to determine from a given single equation

the relation, not of some single elementary class, but of some compound

class, involving in its expression more than one element, in terms of the

remaining elements. The following particular example, and the succeeding

general problem, are of this nature.

• Tt)v vxip np<>C apirrjv t'lpwiKiiv riva Kai 8iiav.—Nic. Era. Book TU.

EX. 2.—Let us resume the symbolical expression of the definition of

wealth employed in Chap, vn., viz.,w = st{p+r(l-p)}, wherein, as before,

w = wealth,

                            * = things limited in supply,

t = things transferable,

p = things productive of pleasure,

                          r = things preventive of pain;

and suppose it required to determine hence the relation of things transferable

and productive of pleasure, to the other elements of the definition, viz.,

wealth, things limited in supply, and things preventive of pain.

The expression for things transferable and productive of pleasure is (p. Let

us represent this by a new symbol y. We have then the equations

w = st {p + r(l - p)},

                                        y = t
                                              P,

from which, if we eliminate I and p, we may determine y as a function of w,

s, and r. The result interpreted will give the relation sought.

  Bringing the terms of these equations to the first side, we

have

w-stp-str(l-p) = 0.

                                                                              y-tp = 0. W

And adding the squares of these equations together,

w + stp + str (1 -p) - 2wstp - Iwstr (1 -p) + y+tp- 2ytp = 0. (4)

Developing the first member with respect to t and p, in order to eliminate

those symbols, we have

(w + s - 2ws + 1 -y)tp + (w + sr- 2wsr + y) t (1 - p)

+ (w + y) (1 - t)p + (w + y)(l- 0 (1 -p); (5)

and the result of the elimination of I and p will be obtained by equating to 0

the product of the four coefficients oftp, <(1 -p), (1 - t)p, and (1 -t)(l- p).

Or, by Prop. 3, the result of the elimination of t and p from the above

equation will be of the form

wherein E is the result obtained by changing in the given equation y into 1,
                                        1
and then eliminating t and p; and E the result obtained by changing in the

same equation y into 0, and then eliminating t and p. And the mode in each

case of eliminating t and p is to multiply together the coefficients of the four

constituents tp, t(l- p), &c.

If we make y = 1, the coefficients become—

1st. w (1 - *) + « (1 - w).

2nd. 1 + w (1 - sr) + * (1 - w) r, equivalent to 1 by Prop. I.

3rd and 4th. 1 + w, equivalent to 1 by Prop. I.

  Hence the value of E will be

ic(l - s) + *(1 -w).

  Again, in (5) making y = 0, we have for the coefficients—

1st. 1 + w (1 - s) + s (1 - w), equivalent to 1.

2nd. w (1 - sr) + sr (1 - w).

3rd and 4th. w.


    The product of these coefficients gives 

                  E' = w(l-sr). 


The equation from which y is to be determined, therefore, is

{w(l - s) + * (1 - w)}y + w(l- sr) (1 - y) = 0,


           w (1 - sr) 
        y=
    *'•   JT(1 -sr)-w(l-s)-s(l-w)'' 


and expanding the second member,

y = Q w«r + ws (1 - r) + - w (1 - *) r + - w (1 - *) (1 - r)

+ 0 (1 - »)«r + 0 (1 -») «(1 -r) + £(1 - w) (1 - «) r  jj(l-«,)(l-,)(l-r);

whence reducing

y = ws (1 - r) + - wsr + - (1 - w) (1 - *), (6)

                                                                  with w (1 - s) - 0. (7)

The interpretation of which is—

1st. Things transferable and productive of pleasure consist of all wealth

(limited in supply and) not preventive of pain, an indefinite amount of wealth

(limited in supply and) preventive of pain, and an indefinite amount of what

is not wealth and not limited in supply.

2nd. All wealth is limited in supply.

I have in the above solution written in parentheses that part of the full

description which is implied by the accompanying independent relation (7).

8. The following problem is of a more general nature, and will furnish an

easy practical rule for problems such as the last.

  GENERAL PROBLEM.

  Given any equation connecting the symbols x,y..w,z..

  Required to determine the logical expression of .any class expressed in any

way by the symbols x, y.. in terms of the remaining symbols, w, z, &c.

Let us confine ourselves to the case in which there are but two symbols, x,

y, and two symbols, w, z, a case sufficient to determine the general Rule.

Let V = 0 be the given equation, and let <j> (x, y) represent the class

whose expression is to be determined.

  Assume t = <p(x,y), then, from the above two equations, x and y are to be

eliminated.

Now the equation V= 0 may be expanded in the form

Axy + Bx(l-y)+ C(l - x)y + D{\ - x) (1 - y) = 0, (1) A, B, C, and D being

functions of the symbols w and z.

  Again, as <j> (x, y) represents a class or collection of things, it must

consist of a constituent, or series of constituents, whose coefficients are 1.  Wherefore if the full development of <p (x, y) be represented in the form

axy + bx(l - y) + c(l - x)y + d(l - x) (I - y),

the coefficients a, b, c, d must each be 1 or 0.

Now reducing the equation t = <j> (x, y) by transposition and squaring, to

the form

t {1 - <p(«,y)} + <p (x, y) (1 - t) - 0;

and expanding with reference to x and y, we get

  {t(l-a) + a(l-t))xy+ {<(1 - ft) + 6(1 - <)} x(l - y)

                              + {*(l-c) + c(l-0J (!-*)y

+ {*(l-d)+ d(!-')! (l-a;)(l-y) = 0;

whence, adding this to (1), we have

{A + t(l-a) + a(l-t))xy

+ {B + t(l -b) + 4(l-<)) a:(l-y) +&C = 0. Let the result of the elimination of

x and y be of the form Et + E (1-0 = 0,

then E will, by what has been said, be the reduced product of what the

coefficients of the above expansion become when r - 1, and E the product of

the same factors similarly reduced by the condition t = 0.

  Hence E will be the reduced product

(A + 1 - a) (B+ 1 - ft) (C+ 1 -c) (D + 1 -d).

Considering any factor of this expression, as A + 1 - a, we see that when a =

1 it becomes -4, and when a = 0 it becomes 1 + .A, which reduces by Prop. I.

to 1. Hence we may infer that E will be the product of the coefficients of

those constituents in the development of V whose coefficients in the

development of <j> (x, y) are 1.

  Moreover E will be the reduced product

(A + a) (B + b) (C + c) (D + d).

Considering any one of these factors, as A + a, we see that this becomes A

when a = 0, and reduces to 1 when a = 1; and so on for the others. Hence E

will be the product of the coefficients of those constituents iii thedevelopment of y, whose coefficients in the development $ (x, y) are 0.

Viewing these cases together, we may establish the following Rule:

9. To deduce from a logical equation the relation of any class expressed by

a given combination of the symbols x, y, Sfc, to the classes represented by any

other symbols involved in the given equation.

  RULE.—Expand the given equation with reference to the symbols x, y. Then

form the equation

Et + E'(l-t) = 0,

in which E is the product of the coefficients of all those constituents in the

above development, whose coefficients in the expression of the given class

are 1, and E the product of the coefficients of those constituents of the

development whose coefficients in the expression of the given class are 0. The

value oft deduced from the above equation by solution and interpretation will

be the expression required.

  NOTE.—Although in the demonstration of this Rule V is supposed to consist

solely of positive terms, it may easily be shown that this condition is

unnecessary, and the Rule general, and that no preparation of the given

equation is really required.

10. EX. 3.—The same definition of wealth being given as in

Example 2, required an expression for things transferable, but not

productive of pleasure, t (1 - p), in terms of the other elements

represented by w, s, and r.

The equation

w - sip - str (1 - p) = 0,

gives, when squared,

w + stp + sir (1 - p) - 2wstp - 2wstr (1 - p) = 0;

and developing the first member with respect to t and p,

(w + s- 2ws) tp + (w + sr- 2wsr) t (1 - p) + w (1 - t)p

                                                                          + w(l-0(l-p)=0.The coefficients of which it is best to exhibit as in the following equation;

    {w(l-s)+s(l-w)}tp+{w(l-sr) + sr(l-w)}t(l-p) + w(l-t)p
                                                <

          + w (1 - 0 (1 - p) = 0. Let the function t (1 - p) to be determined, be

        represented by z; then the full development of z in respect of t and p is

z = 0 tp + t (1 - p) + 0 (1 - t) p + 0 (1 - t) (1 - p).

  Hence, by the last problem, we have

Ez + E'(l-z)~0;

where E = w (1 - sr) + sr (1 - to);

  E'= {w (1 - s) + s (I - w)} x w x w = w (1 - s);

.*. {w (1 - sr) + *r (1 - w)} z + w (1 - s) (1 - z) - 0.

  Hence,

w (1 - *)

z = - J:

  2tc*r - V08 - »r = - wsr + 0 «s (1 - r) + - w (1 - s) r + - w (1 - s) (1 - r),

+ 0 (1 - w) sr + - (1 - w) s (1 - r) + jj (1 - w) (1 - i) r

                                                                + 2 (1 - „) (1 - ,) (1 - ).

z = -w«r+-(l-w) s(l-r) + - (1-w)(l-«), with w (1 - *) = 0.

  Hence, Things transferable and not productive of pleasure are either

wealth (limited in supply and preventive of pain); or tilings which are not

wealth, but limited in supply and not preventive of pain; or things which are

not wealth, and are unlimited in supply.

The following results, deduced in a similar manner, will be easily verified:

Things limited in supply and productive of pleasure which are not wealth,

—are intransferable.

  WeaWi that is not productive of pleasure is transferable, limited in supply,

and preventive of pain.

Things limited in supply which are either wealth, or are productive of

pleasure, but not both,—are either transferable and preventive of pain, orintransferable.

11. From the domain of natural history a large number of curious examples

might be selected. I do not, however, conceive that such applications would

possess any independent value. They would, for instance, throw no light upon

the true principles of classification in the science of zoology. For the

discovery of these, some basis of positive knowledge is requisite,— some

acquaintance with organic structure, with teleological adaptation; and this is a

species of knowledge which can only be derived from the use of external

means of observation and analysis. Taking, however, any collection of

propositions in natural history, a great number of logical problems present

themselves, without regard to the system of classification adopted. Perhaps in

forming such examples, it is better to avoid, as superfluous, the mention of

that property of a class or species which is immediately suggested by its

name, e. g. the ring-structure in the annelida, a class of animals including the

earth-worm and the leech.

EX. 4.—1. The annelida are soft-bodied, and either naked or enclosed in a

tube.

2. The annelida consist of all invertebrate animals having red blood in a

double system of circulating vessels.

  Assume a = annelida;

* = soft-bodied animals;

                                      n = naked;

t = enclosed in a tube;

                                  i = invertebrate;

r = having red blood, &c.

Then the propositions given will be expressed by the equations

a = vs {n(l- t) + t(l-n)); (1)

a = ir; (2)

to which we may add the implied condition,

                                                                                nt = 0. (3)On eUminating v, and reducing the system to a singlo equation, we have

a {l-sn(l-t)-st(l-n)} +a(l-t>) + t>(l-a) +nt= 0. (4)

  Suppose that we wish to obtain the relation in which softbodied animals

enclosed in tubes are placed (by virtue of the premises) with respect to the

following elements, viz., the possession of red blood, of an external covering,

and of a vertebral column.

We must first eliminate a. The result is

ir { 1 - sn (1 - t) - 8t (1 - n)) + nt = 0.

Then (IX. 9) developing with respect to « and t, and reducing the first

coefficient by Prop. 1, we have

fut+!>(l-n)s(l-<) + (tV+n)(l-s)< + iy(l-s)(l-0 = 0. (5)

Hence, if st = to, we find

nw .¥ ir (1 - n) x (ir + n) x ir (I -10) = 0;

or, nw + ir (1 - n) (1 - w) = 0;

                                          ir(l-n) 
=i i (1= 4 0i(L=r)n s Qi (1=r) (1= m)
SO A r(-m 0 (=) (-
+a-DA-DA-n);

or, w-ir(l—n)+%i(l—r)(lfn)+g(14i}(lfﬂ).

Hence, soft-bodied animals enclosed in tubes consist of all
incertebrate animals having red blood and not naked, and an in-
definite remainder of invertebrate animals not having red bood and
not nahed, and of vertebrate animals which are not naked.

Andin an exactly similar manner, the following reduced equa-
tions, the interpretation of which is left to the reader, have been
deduced from the development (5).

f(1-=ims iQ-m 13 (1-1)
(-9 t=0@-Dr@-m+ga-N0-n

(l—-x)(lvl):%i(lfr)og(lfr),
In none of the above examples has it been my object to exhibit in any

special manner the power of the method. That, I conceive, can only be fully

displayed in connexion with the mathematical theory of probabilities. I

would, however, suggest to any who may be desirous of forming a correct

opinion upon this point, that they examine by the rules of ordinary logic the

following problem, before inspecting its solution; remembering at the same

time, that whatever complexity it possesses might be multiplied indefinitely,

with no other effect than to render its solution by the method of this work

more operose, but not less certainly attainable.

EX. 5. Let the observation of a class of natural productions be supposed to

have led to the following general results.

1st, That in whichsoever of these productions the properties A and C are

missing, the property E is found, together with one of the properties B and I),

but not with both.

2nd, That wherever the properties A and D are found while E is missing,

the properties B and C will either both be found, or both be missing.3rd, That wherever the property A is found in conjunction with either B or

E, or both of them, there either the property C or the property D will be

found, but not both of them. And conversely, wherever the property C or D is

found singly, there the property A will be found in conjunction with either B

or E, or both of them.

Let it then be required to ascertain, first, what in any particular instance

may be concluded from the ascertained presence <if the property A, with

reference to the properties B, C, and D; also whether any relations exist

independently among the properties B, C, and 7). Secondly, what may be

concluded in like manner respecting the property B, and the properties A, C,

andi>.

It will be observed, that in each of the three data, the information conveyed

respecting the properties A, B, C, and D, is complicated with another element,

E, about which we desire to say nothing in our conclusion. It will hence be

requisite to eliminate the symbol representing the property E from the system

of equations, by which the given propositions will be expressed.

Let us represent the property A by x, B by y, C by z, D by w, E by v. The

data are

~xz = qv (yw + toy); (1)

vxw = q(yz + yz); (2)

xy + xvy = wz + zw; (3)

x standing for 1 - x, &c., and q being an indefinite class symbol. Eliminating

q separately from the first and second equations, and adding the results to the

third equation reduced by (5), Chap/vm., we get

x"z(\ -vyw-vtvy) + vxw(yz + zy) + (xy + xvy) (wz+ wz)

+ (wz + zw) (I -xy-xvy) = 0. (4)

  From this equation » must be eliminated, and the value of x determined

from the result. For effecting this object, it will be convenient to employ the

method of Prop. 3 of the present chapter.

Let then the result of elimination be represented by the

equationEx+ E'(l-x) = 0.

To find E make x = 1 in the first member of (4), we find

vw (yz + zy) + {y + vy) (wz + wz) + (wz + zw) vy.

Eliminating w, we have

(wz + wz) (w(\jz + zy) + y(wz + wz)-^y (wz + zw));

which, on actual multiplication, in accordance with the conditions ww = 0, zz

= 0, &c., gives

  E=wz + ywz.

Next, to find E make x = 0 in (4), we have

z(l -vyw-vyw) + wz + zw. whence, eliminating «, and reducing the result by

Propositions

1 and 2, we find

E = wz + zw+ywz;

and, therefore, finally we have

(wz + ywz)x + (wz + zw+ywz)x = 0; (5)

from which


     wz + zw + ywz 

    wz + ziv+ ywz — wz- ywz' 


wherefore, by development,

x = Oyzw + yzw + yzw + Oyzw + Qyzio + yzw + yzw + yz~v; or, collecting

the terms in vertical columns,

x = zj} + zw + yz!>; (6)

the interpretation of which is—

In whatever substances the property A is found, there will also be found

either the property C or the property D, but not both, or else the properties B,

C, and D, will all be wanting. And conversely, where either the property C or

the property D is found singly, or the properties B, C, and D, are togethermissing, there the property A will be found.

It also appears that there is no independent relation among the properties B,

C, and D.

  Secondly, we are to find y. Now developing (5) with respect to that

symbol,

(xwz + xwz + xwz + xzio)y+ (xwz + xwz + xzw + xzlv)y = 0; whence,

proceeding as before,

y = xwz + - (xwz + xwz + xzw), (7)

                                                                              xzw = 0; (8)

                                                                            xzw = 0; (9)

                                                                          xzw = Q; (10)

From (10) reduced by solution to the form


     0 

    xz = - JO; 


we have the independent relation,—If the property A is absent and C present,

D is present. Again, by addition and solution (8)

and (9) give

__ 0_

xz + xz = - w.

Whence we have for the general solution and the remaining independent

relation:

1st. If the property Bbe present in one of the productions, either the

properties A, C, and D, are all absent, or some one alone of them is absent.

And conversely, if they are all absent it may be concluded that the property A

is present (7).

2nd. If A and C are both present or both absent, D will be absent, quite

independently of the presence or absence ofB (8) and (9).

I have not attempted to verify these conclusions.  CHAPTER X.

OF THE CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD.

r
1,  I^HE subject of Primary Propositions has been discussed at -*- length,

and we are about to enter upon the consideration of Secondary Propositions.

The interval of transition between these two great divisions of the science of

Logic may afford a fit occasion for us to pause, and while reviewing some of

the past steps of our progress, to inquire what it is that in a subject like that

with which we have been occupied constitutes perfection of method. I do not

here speak of that perfection only which consists in power, but of that also

which is founded in the conception of what is fit and beautiful. It is probable

that a careful analysis of this question would conduct us to some such

conclusion as the following, viz., that a perfect method should not only be an

efficient one, as respects the accomplishment of the objects for which it is

designed, but should in all its parts and processes manifest a certain unity and

harmony. This conception would be most fully realized if even the very

forms of the method were suggestive of the fundamental principles, and if

possible of the one fundamental principle, upon which they are founded. In

applying these considerations to the science of Reasoning, it may be well to

extend our view beyond the mere analytical processes, and to inquire what is

best as respects not only the mode or form of deduction, but also the system

of data or premises from which the deduction is to be made.

2. As respects mere power, there is no doubt that the first of the methods

developed in Chapter vm. is, within its proper sphere, a perfect one. The

introduction of arbitrary constants makes us independent of the forms of the

premises, as well as of any conditions among the equations by which they are

represented. But it seems to introduce a foreign element, and while it is a

more laborious, it is also a less elegant form of solution than the second

method of reduction demonstrated in the same chapter. There are, however,

conditions under which the latter method assumes a more perfect form than it

otherwise bears. To make the one fundamental condition expressed by the

equation

x(l -x) = 0,

the universal type of form, would give a unity of character to both processes

and results, which would not else be attainable. Were brevity or convenience

the only valuable quality of a method, no advantage would flow from theadoption of such a principle. For to impose upon every step of a solution the

character above described, would involve in some instances no slight labour

of preliminary reduction. But it is still interesting to know that this can be

done, and it is even of some importance to be acquainted with the conditions

under which such a form of solution would spontaneously present itself.

Some of these points will be considered in the present chapter.

  PROPOSITION I.

3. To reduce any equation among logical symbols to the form V — 0, in

which V satisfies the law of duality,

V(l - V) - 0.

It is shown in Chap. V. Prop. 4, that the above condition is satisfied

whenever V is the sum of a series of constituents. And it is evident from Prop.

2, Chap. vI. that all equations are equivalent which, when reduced by

transposition to the form V = 0, produce, by development of the first member,

the same series of constituents with coefficients which do not vanish; the

particular numerical values of those coefficients being immaterial.

  Hence the object of this Proposition may always be accomplished by

bringing all the terms of an equation to the first side, fully expanding that

member, and changing in the result all the coefficients which do not vanish

into unity, except such as have already that value.

But as the development of functions containing many symbols conducts us

to expressions inconvenient from their great length, it is desirable to show

how, in the only cases which do practically offer themselves to our notice,

this source of complexity may be avoided.

The great primary forms of equations have already been discussed in

Chapter vin. They are—

X = vY,

X = Y,

vX = vY.

Whenever the conditions X (1 - X) = 0, Y(l - Y) = 0, are satisfied, we have

seen that the two first of the above equations conduct us to the forms

                                                                            X(1-Y)«0, (1)X{l - Y)+ Y(l -X) = 0; (2)

and under the same circumstances it may be shown that the last of them gives

v{X(l- Y)+ Y(1-X)}=0; (3)

all which results obviously satisfy, in their first members, the

condition

F(l - V) = 0.

Now as the above are the forms and conditions under which the equations of

a logical system properly expressed do actually present themselves, it is

always possible to reduce them by the above method into subjection to the

law required. Though, however, the separate equations may thus satisfy the

law, their equivalent sum (VIII. 4) may not do so, and it remains to show how

upon it also the requisite condition may be imposed.

Let us then represent the equation formed by adding the several reduced

equations of the system together, in the form

                                                                v + v + v", &c. = 0, (4)

this equation being singly equivalent to the system from which it was

obtained. We suppose v, v, v", &c. to be class terms (IX. 1) satisfying the

conditions

v (1 - ») - 0, v (1 - i'') = 0, &c.

Now the full interpretation of (4) would be found by developing the first

member with respect to all the elementary symbols x, y, &c. which it

contains, and equating to 0 all the constituents whose coefficients do not

vanish; in other words, all the constituents which are found in either v, v', v",

&c. But those constituents consist of—1st, such as are found in v; 2nd, such

as are not found in v, but are found in 1/; 3rd, such as are neither found in v

nor v', but are found in v", and so on. Hence they will be such as are found in

the expression

» + (l-»)t/ + (l -v) (1 -v')v+ &c., (5)

an expression in which no constituents are repeated, and which obviously

satisfies the law V(l - V) = 0. Thus if we had the expression

(1 -<) + » + (1 - z) + tzw,in which the terms 1 - t, 1 - z are bracketed to indicate that they are to be

taken as single class terms, we should, in accordance with (5), reduce it to an

expression satisfying the condition

V (1 - V) = 0, by multiplying all the terms after the first by t, then all alter the

second by 1 - v; lastly, the term which remains after the third by z; the result

being

l-t + tv + t(l-v)(l-z) + t(l-c)zw. (6)

4. All logical equations then are reducible to the form V= 0,

V satisfying the law of duality. But it would obviously be a higher degree of

perfection if equations always presented themselves in such a form, without

preparation of any kind, and not only exhibited this form in their original

statement, but retained it unimpaired after those additions which are

necessary in order to reduce systems of equations to single equivalent forms.

That they do not spontaneously present this feature is not properly

attributable to defect of method, but is a consequence of the fact that our

premises are not always complete, and accurate, and independent. They are

not complete when they involve material (as distinguished from formal)

relations, which are not expressed. They are not accurate when they imply

relations which are not intended. But setting aside these points, with which,

in the present instance, we are less concerned, let it be considered in what

sense they may fail of being independent.

5. A system of propositions may be termed independent,

when it is not possible to deduce from any portion of the system

a conclusion deducible from any other portion of it. Supposing

the equations representing those propositions all reduced to the

form

F=0,

then the above condition implies that no constituent which can be made to

appear in the development of a particular function V of the system, can be

made to appear in the development of any other function V of the same

system. When this condition is not satisfied, the equations of the system are

not independent. This may happen in various cases. Let all the equationssatisfy in their first members the law of duality, then if there appears a

positive term x in the expansion of one equation, and a term xy in that of

another, the equations are not independent, for the term x is further

developable into xy + x (1 - y), and the equation

xy = 0

is thus involved in both the equations of the system. Again, let a term xy

appear in one equation, and a term xz in another. Both these may be

developed so as to give the common constituent xyz. And other cases may

easily be imagined in which premises which appear at first sight to be quite

independent are not really so. Whenever equations of the form V = 0 are thus

not truly independent, though individually they may satisfy the law of

duality,

V(l-V) = 0,

the equivalent equation obtained by adding them together will not satisfy that

condition, unless sufficient reductions by the method of the present chapter

have been performed. When, on the other hand, the equations of a system

both satisfy the above law, and are independent of each other, their sum will

also satisfy the same law. I have dwelt upon these points at greater length

than would otherwise have been necessary, because it appears to me to be

important to endeavour to form to ourselves, and to keep before us in all our

investigations, the pattern of an ideal perfection,—the object and the guide of

future efforts. In the present class of inquiries the chief aim of improvement

of method should be to facilitate, as far as is consistent with brevity, the

transformation of equations, so as to make the fundamental condition above

adverted to universal.

In connexion with this subject the following Propositions are deserving of

attention.

  PROPOSITION II.

If the first member of any equation V = 0 satisfy the condition V(l - V) = 0,

and if the expression of any symbol t of that equation be determined as a

developed function of the other symbols, the

coefficients of the expansion can only assume the forms 1, 0, -, -.

For if the equation be expanded with reference to t, we obtain as the result,Et + E(l-t), (1)

E and E being what V becomes when t is successively changed

therein into 1 and 0. Hence E and E will themselves satisfy

the conditions

E(l-E) = 0, E(l-E) = 0. (2)

Now (1) gives

E t =



E - E*

the second member of which is to be expanded as a function of the remaining

symbols. It is evident that the only numerical values which E and E can

receive in the calculation of the coefficients will be 1 and 0. The following

cases alone can therefore arise:

ist. /;%. i, /•;. i, then .,-"—,-jj.
                      T

2nd. E=l, E=0, then " = 1.

















3rd. £ =0, then

  

4th. E-=0, then -

 

Whence the truth of the Proposition is manifest.
 
6. It may be remarked that the forms 1, 0, and — appear in

the solution of equations independently of any reference to the

condition F(l - V) = 0. But it is not so with the coefficient —.The terms to which this coefficient is attached when the above condition is

satisfied may receive any other value except the

three values 1, 0, and -, when that condition is not satisfied. It

is permitted, and it would conduce to uniformity, to change any coefficient of

a development not presenting itself in any of the

four forms referred to in this Proposition into -, regarding this

as the symbol proper to indicate that the coefficient to which it is attached

should be equated to 0. This course I shall frequently adopt.

  PROPOSITION III.

7. The result of the elimination of any symbols x, y, Sfc.from an equation

F=0, of which the first member identically satisfies the law of duality,

V(l - V) - o,

may be obtained by developing the given equation with reference to the other

symbols, and equating to 0 the sum of those constituents whose coefficients in

the expansion are equal to unity.

  Suppose that the given equation P= 0 involves but three symbols, x, y, and

t, of which x and y are to be eliminated. Let the development of the equation,

with respect to t, be

                                                                    At + B(l-t) = 0, (1)

A and B being free from the symbol t.

By Chap. iX. Prop. 3, the result of the elimination of x and y from the

given equation will be of the form

                                                                    Et + E(l-t) = 0, (2)

in which E is the result obtained by eliminating the symbols x and y from the

equation A = 0, E the result obtained by eliminating from the equation B = 0.

Now A and B must satisfy the condition

A(l-A) = 0, B(l-B) = 0. Hence A (confining ourselves for the present to this

coefficient) will either be 0 or 1, or a constituent, or the sum of a part of the

constituents which involve the symbols x and y. If A = 0 it is evident that E =

0; if A is a single constituent, or the sum of a part of the constituentsinvolving x and y, E will be 0. For the fall development of A, with respect to x

and y, will contain terms with vanishing coefficients, and E is the product of

all the coefficients. Hence when A = 1, -Eis equal to A, but in other cases E is

equal to 0. Similarly, when B = 1, E is equal to B, but in other cases E

vanishes. Hence the expression (2) will consist of that part, if any there be, of

(1) in which the coefficients A, B are unity. And this reasoning is general.

Suppose, for instance, that V involved the symbols x, y, z, t, and that it were

required to eliminate x and y. Then if the development of V, with reference to

z and t, were

zt + xz (1 -1) + y (1 - z) t + (1 - z) (1 -1),

the result sought would be

s* + (l-z)(l-«) = 0,

this being that portion of the development of which the coefficients are unity.

  Hence, if from any system of equations we deduce a single equivalent

equation V=0, V satisfying the condition

the ordinary processes of elimination may be entirely dispensed with, and the

single process of development made to supply their place.

8. It may be that there is no practical advantage in the method thus pointed

out, but it possesses a theoretical unity and completeness which render it

deserving of regard, and I shall accordingly devote a future chapter (XIV.) to

its illustration. The progress of applied mathematics has presented other and

signal examples of the reduction of systems of problems or equations to the

dominion of some central but pervading law.

9. It is seen from what precedes that there is one class of propositions to

which all the special appliances of the above methods of preparation are

unnecessary. It is that which is characterized by the following conditions:

First, That the propositions are of the ordinary kind, implied by the use of

the copula is or are, the predicates being particular.

  Secondly, That the terms of the proposition are intelligible without the

supposition of any understood relation among the elements which enter into

the expression of those terms.

  Thirdly, That the propositions are independent.We may, if such speculation is not altogether vain, permit ourselves to

conjecture that these are the conditions which would be obeyed in the

employment of language as an instrument of expression and of thought, by

unerring beings, declaring simply what they mean, without suppression on

the one hand, and without repetition on the other. Considered both in their

relation to the idea of a perfect language, and in their relation to the processes

of an exact method, these conditions are equally worthy of the attention of

the student.  CHAPTER XI.

OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS, AND OF THE PRINCIPLES OF

THEIR SYMBOLICAL EXPRESSION.

r
1.  I^HE doctrine has already been established in Chap. iV., -*- that every

logical proposition may be referred to one or the other of two great classes,

viz., Primary Propositions and Secondary Propositions. The former of these

classes has been discussed in the preceding chapters of this work, and we are

now led to the consideration of Secondary Propositions, i. e. of Propositions

concerning, or relating to, other propositions regarded as true or false. The

investigation upon which we are entering will, in its general order and

progress, resemble that which we have already conducted. The two inquiries

differ as to the subjects of thought which they recognise, not as to the formal

and scientific laws which they reveal, or the methods or processes which are

founded upon those laws. Probability would in some measure favour the

expectation of such a result. It consists with all that we know of the

uniformity of Nature, and all that we believe of the immutable constancy of

the Author of Nature, to suppose, that in the mind, which has been endowed

with such high capabilities, not only for converse with surrounding scenes,

but for the knowledge of itself, and for reflection upon the laws of its own

constitution, there should exist a harmony and uniformity not less real than

that which the study of the physical sciences makes known to us.

Anticipations such as this are never to be made the primary rule of our

inquiries, nor are they in any degree to divert us from those labours of patient

research by which we ascertain what is the actual constitution of things

within the particular province submitted to investigation. But when the

grounds of resemblance have been properly and independently determined, it

is not inconsistent, even with purely scientific ends, to make that resemblance

a subject of meditation, to trace its extent, and to receive the intimations of

truth, yet undiscovered, which it may seem to us to convey. The necessity of

a final appeal to fact is not thus set aside, nor is the use of analogy extended

beyond its proper sphere,—the suggestion of relations which independent

inquiry must either verify or cause to be rejected.

2. Secondary Propositions are those which concern or relate to

Propositions considered as true or false. The relations of things we express

by primary propositions. But we are able to make Propositions themselves

also the subject of thought, and to express our judgments concerning them.The expression of any such judgment constitutes a secondary proposition.

There exists no proposition whatever of which a competent degree of

knowledge would not enable us to make one or the other of these two

assertions, viz., either that the proposition is true, or that it is false; and each

of these assertions is a secondary proposition. "It is true that the sun shines;"

"It is not true that the planets shine by their own light;" are examples of this

kind. In the former example the Proposition " The sun shines," is asserted to

be true. In the latter, the Proposition, "The planets shine by their own light,"

is asserted to be false. Secondary propositions also include all judgments by

which we express a relation or dependence among propositions. To this class

or division we may refer conditional propositions, as, "If the sun shine the

day will be fair." Also most disjunctive propositions, as, " Either the sun will

shine, or the enterprise will be postponed." In the former example we express

the dependence of the truth of the Proposition, "The day will be fair," upon

the truth of the Proposition, "The sun will shine." In the latter we express a

relation between the two Propositions, "The sun will shine," "The enterprise

will be postponed," implying that the truth of the one excludes the truth of the

other. To the same class of secondary propositions we must also refer all

those propositions which assert the simultaneous truth or falsehood of

propositions, as, "It is not true both that 'the sun will shine' and that 'the

journey will be postponed.'" The elements of distinction which we have

noticed may even be blended together in the same secondary proposition. It

may involve both the disjunctive element expressed by either, or, and the

conditional element expressed by if; in addition to which, the connected

propositions may themselves be of a compound character. If" the sun shine,"

and "leisure permit," then either "the enterprise shall be commenced," or

"some preliminary step shall be taken." In this example a number of

propositions are connected together, not arbitrarily and unmeaningly, but in

such a manner as to express a definite connexion between them,—a

connexion having reference to their respective truth or falsehood. This

combination, therefore, according to our definition, forms a Secondary

Proposition.

The theory of Secondary Propositions is deserving of attentive study, as

well on account of its varied applications, as for that close and harmonious

analogy, already referred to, which it sustains with the theory of Primary

Propositions. Upon each of these points I desire to offer a few further

observations.3. I would in the first place remark, that it is in the form of secondary

propositions, at least as often as in that of primary propositions, that the

reasonings of ordinary life are exhibited. The discourses, too, of the moralist

and the metaphysician are perhaps less often concerning things and their

qualities, than concerning principles and hypotheses, concerning truths and

the mutual connexion and relation of truths. The conclusions which our

narrow experience suggests in relation to the great questions of morals and

society yet unsolved, manifest, in more ways than one, the limitations of their

human origin; and though the existence of universal principles is not to be

questioned, the partial formula? which comprise our knowledge of their

application are subject to conditions, and exceptions, and failure. Thus, in

those departments of inquiry which, from the nature of their subjectmatter,

should be the most interesting of all, much of our actual knowledge is

hypothetical. That there has been a strong tendency to the adoption of the

same forms of thought in writers on speculative philosophy, will hereafter

appear. Hence the introduction of a general method for the discussion of

hypothetical and the other varieties of secondary propositions, will open to us

a more interesting field of applications than we have before met with.

4. The discussion of the theory of Secondary Propositions is in the next

place interesting, from the close and remarkable analogy which it bears with

the theory of Primary Propositions. It will appear, that the formal laws to

which the operations of the mind are subject, are identical in expression in

both cases. The mathematical processes which are founded on those laws are,

therefore, identical also. Thus the methods which have been investigated in

the former portion of this work will continue to be available in the new

applications to which we are about to proceed. But while the laws and

processes of the method remain unchanged, the rule of interpretation must be

adapted to new conditions. Instead of classes of things, we shall have to

substitute propositions, and for the relations of classes and individuals, we

shall have to consider the connexions of propositions or of events. Still,

between the two systems, however differing in purport and interpretation,

there will be seen to exist a pervading harmonious relation, an analogy

which, while it serves to facilitate the conquest of every yet remaining

difficulty, is of itself an interesting subject of study, and a conclusive proof of

that unity of character which marks the constitution of the human faculties.

  PROPOSITION I.5. To investigate the nature of the connexion of Secondary Propositions

with the idea of Time.

It is necessary, in entering upon this inquiry, to state clearly the nature of

the analogy which connects Secondary with Primary Propositions.

  Primary Propositions express relations among things, viewed as

component parte of a universe within the limits of which, whether

coextensive with the limits of the actual universe or not, the. matter of our

discourse is confined. The relations expressed are essentially substantive.

Some, or all, or none, of the members of a given class, are also members of

another class. The subjects to which primary propositions refer—the relations

among those subjects which they express—are all of the above character.

But in treating of secondary propositions, we find ourselves concerned

with another class both of subjects and relations. For the subjects with which

we have to do are themselves propositions, so that the question may be asked,

—Can we regard these subjects also as things, and refer them, by analogy

witH the previous case, to a universe of their own? Again, the relations

among these subject propositions are relations of coexistent truth or

falsehood, not of substantive equivalence. We do not say, when expressing

the connexion of two distinct propositions, that the one is the other, but use

some such forms of speech as the following, according to the meaning which

we desire to convey "Either the proposition X is true, or the proposition Yis
                      :

true;" "If the proposition X is true, the proposition Y is true;" "The

propositions X and Y are jointly true;" and so on.

Now, in considering any such relations as the above, we are not called

upon to inquire into the whole extent of their possible meaning (for this might

involve us in metaphysical questions of causation, which are beyond the

proper limits of science); but it suffices to ascertain some meaning which

they undoubtedly possess, and which is adequate for the purposes of logical

deduction. Let us take, as an instance for examination, the conditional

proposition, "If the proposition X is true, the proposition Y is true." An

undoubted meaning of this proposition is, that the time in which the

proposition X is true, is time in which the proposition Y is true. This indeed is

only a relation of coexistence, and may or may not exhaust the meaning of

the proposition, but it is a relation really involved in the statement of the

proposition, and further, it suffices for all the purposes of logical inference.The language of common life sanctions this view of the essential

connexion of secondary propositions with the notion of time. Thus we limit

the application of a primary proposition by the word "some," but that of a

secondary proposition by the word "sometimes." To say, "Sometimes

injustice triumphs," is equivalent to asserting that there are times in which the

proposition "Injustice now triumphs," is a true proposition. There are indeed

propositions, the truth of which is not thus limited to particular periods or

conjunctures; propositions which are true throughout all time, and have

received the appellation of " eternal truths." The distinction must be familiar

to every reader of Plato and Aristotle, by the latter of whom, especially, it is

employed to denote the contrast between the abstract verities of science, such

as the propositions of geometry which are always true, and those contingent

or phenomenal relations of things which are sometimes true and sometimes

false. But the forms of language in which both kinds of propositions are

expressed manifest a common dependence upon the idea of time; in the one

case as limited to some finite duration, in the other as stretched out to

eternity.

6. It may indeed be said, that in ordinary reasoning we are often quite

unconscious of this notion of time involved in the very language we are

using. But the remark, however just, only serves to show that we commonly

reason by the aid of words and the forms of a well-constructed language,

without attending to the ulterior grounds upon which those very forms have

been established. The course of the present investigation will afford an

illustration of the very same principle. I shall avail myself of the notion of

time in order to determine the laws of the expression of secondary

propositions, as well as the laws of combination of the symbols by which

they are expressed. But when those laws and those forms are once

determined, this notion of time (essential, as I believe it to be, to the above

end) may practically be dispensed with. We may then pass from the forms of

common language to the closely analogous forms of the symbolical

instrument of thought here developed, and use its processes, and interpret its

results, without any conscious recognition of the idea of time whatever.

  PROPOSITION II.

, 7. To establish a system of notation for the expression of Secondary

Propositions, and to show that the symbols which it involves are subject to

the same laws of combination as the corresponding symbols employed in theexpression of Primary Propositions.

Let us employ the capital letters X, Y, Z, to denote the elementary

propositions concerning which we desire to make some assertion touching

their truth or falsehood, or among which we seek to express some relation in

the form of a secondary proposition. And let us employ the corresponding

small letters x, y, z, considered as expressive of mental operations, in the

following sense, viz.: Let x represent an act of the mind by which we fix our

regard upon that portion of time for which the proposition X is true; and let

this meaning be understood when it is asserted that x denotes the time for

which the proposition X is true. Let us further employ the connecting signs +,

-, =, &c., in the following sense, viz.: Let x + y denote the aggregate of those

portions of time for which the propositions X and Fare respectively true,

those times being entirely separated from each other. Similarly let x - y

denote that remainder of time which is left when we take away from the

portion of time for which X is true, that (by supposition) included portion for

which Fis true. Also, let x = y denote that the time for which the proposition

X is true, is identical with the time for which the proposition Fis true. We

shall term x the representative symbol of the proposition X, &c. From the

above definitions it will follow, that we shall

always have

x + y -y + x,

for either member will denote the same aggregate of time.

Let us further represent by xy the performance in succession of the two

operations represented by y and x, i. e. the whole mental operation which

consists of the following elements, viz., 1st, The mental selection of that

portion of time for which the proposition Fis true. 2ndly, The mental

selection, out of that portion of time, of such portion as it contains of the time

in which the proposition X is true,—the result of these successive processes

being the fixing of the mental regard upon the whole of that portion of time

for which the propositions X and F are both true.

  From this definition it will follow, that we shall always have

xy = yx. (1)

For whether we select mentally, first that portion of time for which theproposition F is true, then out of the result that contained portion for which

Xis true; or first, that portion of time for which the proposition X is true, then

out of the result that contained portion of it for which the proposition F is

true; we shall arrive at the same final result, viz., that portion of time for

which the propositions X and F are both true.

By continuing this method of reasoning it may be established, that the laws

of combination of the symbols x, y, z, Sac., in the species of interpretation

here assigned to them, are identical in expression with the laws of

combination of the same symbols, in the interpretation assigned to them in

the first part of this treatise. The reason of this final identity is apparent. For

in both cases it is the same faculty, or the same combination of faculties, of

which we study the operations; operations, the essential character of which is

unaffected, whether we suppose them to be engaged upon that universe of

things in which all existence is contained, or upon that whole of time in

which all events are realized, and to some part, at least, of which all

assertions, truths, and propositions, refer.

  Thus, in addition to the laws above stated, we shall have by (4), Chap, iI.,

the law whose expression is

                                                                x (y + z) = xy + xz; (2)

and more particularly the fundamental law of duality (2) Chap, n., whose

expression is

xi = x, or, x (1 - x) = 0; (3)

a law, which while it serves to distinguish the system of thought in Logic

from the system of thought in the science of quantity, gives to the processes

of the former a completeness and a generality which they could not otherwise

possess.

8. Again, as this law (3) (as well as the other laws) is satisfied by the

symbols 0 and 1, we are led, as before, to inquire whether those symbols do

not admit of interpretation in the present system of thought. The same course

of reasoning which we before pursued shows that they do, and warrants us in

the two following positions, viz.:

1st, That in the expression of secondary propositions, 0 represents nothing

in reference to the element of time.2nd, That in the same system 1 represents the universe, or whole of time,

to which the discourse is supposed in any manner to relate.

As in primary propositions the universe of discourse is sometimes limited

to a small portion of the actual universe of things, and is sometimes co-

extensive with that universe; so in secondary propositions, the universe of

discourse may be limited to a single day or to the passing moment, or it may

comprise the whole duration of time. It may, in the most literal sense, be

"eternal." Indeed, unless there is some limitation expressed or implied in the

nature of the discourse, the proper interpretation of the symbol 1 in secondary

propositions is " eternity;" even as its proper interpretation in the primary

system is the actually existent universe.

9. Instead of appropriating the symbols x, y, z, to the representation of the

truths of propositions, we might with equal propriety apply them to represent

the occurrence of events. In fact, the occurrence of an event both implies, and

is implied by, the truth of a proposition, viz., of the proposition which asserts

the occurrence of the event. The one signification of the symbol x necessarily

involves the other. It will greatly conduce to convenience to be able to

employ our symbols in either of these really equivalent interpretations which

the circumstances of a problem may suggest to us as most desirable; and of

this liberty I shall avail myself whenever occasion requires. In problems of

pure Logic I shall consider the symbols x, y, &c. as representing elementary

propositions, among which relation is expressed in the premises. In the

mathematical theory of probabilities, which, as before intimated (I. 12), rests

upon a basis of Logic, and which it is designed to treat in a subsequent

portion of this work, I shall employ the same symbols to denote the simple

events, whose implied or required frequency of occurrence it counts among

its elements.

  PROPOSITION III.

10. To deduce general Rules for the expression of Secondary Propositions.

In the various inquiries arising out of this Proposition, fulness of

demonstration will be the less necessary, because of the exact analogy which

they bear with similar inquiries already completed with reference to primary

propositions. We shall first consider the expression of terms; secondly, that of

the propositions by which they are connected.As 1 denotes the whole duration of time, and x that portion Of it for which

the proposition X is true, 1 - x will denote that portion of time for which the

proposition X is false.

  Again, as xy denotes that portion of time for which the propositions X and

Y are both true, we shall, by combining this and the previous observation, be

led to the following interpretations, viz.:

The expression x (1 -y) will represent the time during which the

proposition X is true, and the proposition Y false. The expression (1 - x) (1 -

y) will represent the time during which the propositions X and Y are

simultaneously false.

The expression x(l - y) + y(l - x) will express the time during which either

X is true or Y true, but not both; for that time is the sum of the times in which

they are singly and exclusively true. The expression xy + (1 - x) (1 - y) will

express the time during which X and Y are either both true or both false.

If another symbol z presents itself, the same principles remain applicable.

Thus xyz denotes the time in which the propositions X, Y, and Z are

simultaneously true; (I-x) (I-y) (I - z) the time in which they are

simultaneously false; and the sum of these expressions would denote the time

in which they are either true or false together.

The general principles of interpretation involved in the above examples do

not need any further illustrations or more explicit statement.

11. The laws of the expression of propositions may now be exhibited and

studied in the distinct cases in which they present themselves. There is,

however, one principle of fundamental importance to which I wish in the first

place to direct attention. Although the principles of expression which have

been laid down are perfectly general, and enable us to limit our assertions of

the truth or falsehood of propositions to any particular portions of that whole

of time (whether it be aD unlimited eternity, or a period whose beginning and

whose end are definitely fixed, or the passing moment) which constitutes the

universe of our discourse, yet, in the actual procedure of human reasoning,

such limitation is not commonly employed. When we assert that a

proposition is true, we generally mean that it is true throughout the whole

duration of the time to which our discourse refers; and when different

assertions of the unconditional truth or falsehood of propositions are jointlymade as the premises of a logical demonstration, it is to the same universe of

time that those assertions are referred, and not to particular and limited parts

of it. In that necessary matter which is the object or field of the exact sciences

every assertion of a truth may be the assertion of an "eternal truth." In

reasoning upon transient phenomena (as of some social conjuncture) each

assertion may be qualified by an immediate reference to the present time,

"Now." But in both cases, unless there is a distinct expression to the contrary,

it is to the same period of duration that each separate proposition relates. The

cases which then arise for our consideration are the following:

1st: To express the Proposition, " The proposition X is true."

We are here required to express that within those limits of time to which

the matter of our discourse is confined the proposition X is true. Now the time

for which the proposition X is true is denoted by x, and the extent of time to

which our discourse refers is represented by 1. Hence we have

x = 1 (4)

as the expression required.

2nd. To express the Proposition, "The proposition X is false."

We are here to express that within the limits of time to which

our discourse relates, the proposition X is false; or that within

those limits there is no portion of time for which it is true. Now

the portion of time for which it is true is x. Hence the required

equation will be

x = 0. (5)

This result might also be obtained by equating to the whole duration of time

1, the expression for the time during which the proposition X is false, viz., 1 -

x. This gives

                                        1-x- 1,

whence a; = 0.

3rd. To express the disjunctive Proposition, "Either the proposition X is

true or the proposition Y is true;" it being thereby implied that the saidpropositions are mutually exclusive, that is to say, that one only of them is

true.

The time for which either the proposition X is true or the proposition Y is

true, but not both, is represented by the expression x (1 - y) + y (1 - x). Hence

we have

x(l-y) + y(l-x) = l, (6)

for the equation required.

If in the above Proposition the particles either, or, are supposed not to

possess an absolutely disjunctive power, so that the possibility of the

simultaneous truth of the propositions X and Y is not excluded, we must add

to the first member of the above equations the term xy. We shall thus have

xy + x(l -y) + (l-x)y = 1, or x + (1 - x)y = 1. *'

4th. To express the conditional Proposition, "If the proposition Y is true,

the proposition X is true."

  Since whenever the proposition Y is true, the proposition X is true, it is

necessary and sufficient here to express, that the time in which the

proposition Y is true is time in which the proposition X is true; that is to say,

that it is some indefinite portion of the whole time in which the proposition X

is true. Now the time in which the proposition Y is true is y, and the whole

time in which the proposition X is true is x. Let v be a symbol of time

indefinite, then will vx represent an indefinite portion of the whole time x.

Accordingly, we shall have

y = vx

as the expression of the proposition given.

12. When v is thus regarded as a symbol of time indefinite, vx may be

understood to represent the whole, or an indefinite part, or no part, of the

whole time x; for any one of these meanings may be realized by a particular

determination of the arbitrary symbol v. Thus, if v be determined to represent

a time in which the whole time x is included, vx will represent the whole time

x. If v be determined to represent a time, some part of which is ineluded in the

time x, but which does not fill up the measure of that time, vx will represent a

part of the time x. If, lastly, v is determined to represent a time, of which nopart is common with any part of the time x, vx will assume the value 0, and

will be equivalent to "no time," or "never."

Now it is to be observed that the proposition, "If Y is true, X is true,"

contains no assertion of the truth of either of the propositions X and Y. It may

equally consist with the supposition that the truth of the proposition Y is a

condition indispensable to the truth of the proposition X, in which case we

shall have v = 1; or with the supposition that although Y expresses a condition

which, when realized, assures us of the truth of X, yet X may be true without

implying the fulfilment of that condition, in which case v denotes a time,

some part of which is contained in the whole time x; or, lastly, with the

supposition that the proposition Y is not true at all, in which case v represents

some time, no part of which is common with any part of the time x. All these

cases are involved in the general supposition that v is a symbol of time

indefinite.

5th. To express a proposition in which the conditional and the disjunctive

characters both exist.

The general form of a conditional proposition is, "If Y is true, X is true,"

and its expression is, by the last section, y = vx. We may properly, in analogy

with the usage which has been established in primary propositions, designate

Y and X as the terms of the conditional proposition into which they enter; and

we may further adopt the language of the ordinary Logic, which designates

the term Y, to winch the particle if is attached, the "antecedent" of the

proposition, and the term X the "consequent."

Now instead of the terms, as in the above case, being simple propositions,

let each or either of them be a disjunctive proposition involving different

terms connected by the particles either, or, as in the following illustrative

examples, in which X, Y, Z, &c. denote simple propositions.

1st. If either X is true or Yis true, then Z\§ true. 2nd. If X is true, then either Y

is true or Z true.

3rd. If either X is true or Y is true, then either Z and W are both true, or thev

are both false.

It is evident that in the above cases the relation of the antecedent to the

consequent is not affected by the circumstance that one of those terms or both

are of a disjunctive character. Accordingly it is only necessary to obtain, inconformity with the principles already established, the proper expressions for

the antecedent and the consequent, to affect the latter with the indefinite

symbol v, and to equate the results. Thus for the propositions above stated we

shall have the respective equations,

1st. x(l -y) + (1 -x)y = vz.

2nd. x = v{y(l-z) + z(l-y)).

3rd. x (1 - y) + y (1 - x) = v {zw + (1 - z) (1 - w) j.

The rule here exemplified is of general application.

  Cases in which the disjunctive and the conditional elements enter in a

manner different from the above into the expression of a compound

proposition, are conceivable, but I am not aware that they are ever presented

to us by the natural exigencies of human reason, and I shall therefore refrain

from any discussion of them. No serious difficulty will arise from this

omission, as the general principles which have formed the basis of the above

applications are perfectly general, and a slight effort of thought will adapt

them to any imaginable case.

13. In the laws of expression above stated those of interpretation are

implicitly involved. The equation

                                          x= 1

must be understood to express that the proposition X is true;

the equation

                                          x- 0,

that the proposition X is false. The equation

                                          xy= 1

will express that the propositions X and Y are both true together; and the

equation

                                        ay = 0

that they are not both together true.

In like manner the equations                                  *(i-y) + y(i -*)-i.

xl
( -y) + y(l-x) = 0, will respectively assert the truth and the falsehood of the

disjunctive Proposition, "Either X is true or Y is true." The equations

y = vx

                                      y = v(l-x)

will respectively express the Propositions, "If the proposition Y is true, the

proposition X is true." "If the proposition Y is true, the proposition X is false."

  Examples will frequently present themselves, in the succeeding chapters of

this work, of a case in which some terms of a particular member of an

equation are affected by the indefinite symbol v, and others not so affected.

The following instance will serve for illustration. Suppose that we have

y = xz + vx(l - z). Here it is implied that the time for which the proposition Y

is true consists of all the time for which X and Z are together true, together

with an indefinite portion of the time for which X is true and Z false. From

this it may be seen, 1st, That if Yis true, either X and Zare together true, or X

is true and Z false; 2ndly, If X and Z are together true, Y is true. The latter of

these may be called the reverse interpretation, and it consists in taking the

antecedent out of the second member, and the consequent from the first

member of the equation. The existence of a term in the second member,

whose coefficient is unity, renders this latter mode of interpretation possible.

The general principle which it involves may be thus stated:

14. PRINCIPLE.—Any constituent term or terms in a particular member of an

equation which have for their coefficient unity, may be taken as the

antecedent of a proposition, of which all the terms in the other member form

the consequent.

  Thus the equation

y - xz + vx (1 - z) + (1 - a:) (1 - z) would have the following interpretations:

  DIRECT INTERPRETATION.—If the proposition Yis true, then either X and Z are true, or

X is true and Z false, or X and Z are both false.

  BEVERSE INTERPRETATION.—If either X and Z are true, or X and Z are false, Y is true.

The aggregate of these partial interpretations will express the whole

significance of the equation given.15. We may here call attention again to the remark, that although the idea

of time appears to be an essential element in the theory of the interpretation

of secondary propositions, it may practically be neglected as soon as the laws

of expression and of interpretation are definitely established. The forms to

which those laws give rise seem, indeed, to correspond with the forms of a

perfect language. Let us imagine any known or existing language freed from

idioms and divested of superfluity, and let us express in that language any

given proposition in a manner the most simple and literal,—the most in

accordance with those principles of pure and universal thought upon which

all languages are founded, of which all bear the manifestation, but from

which all have more or less departed. The transition from such a language to

the notation of analysis would consist of no more than the substitution of one

set of signs for another, without essential change either of form or character.

For the elements, whether things or propositions, among which relation is

expressed, we should substitute letters; for the disjunctive conjunction we

should write +; for the connecting copula or sign of relation, we should write

=. This analogy I need not pursue. Its reality and completeness will be made

more apparent from the study of those forms of expression which will present

themselves in subsequent applications of the present theory, viewed in more

immediate comparison with that imperfect yet noble instrument of thought—

the English language.

16. Upon the general analogy between the theory of Primary and that of

Secondary Propositions, I am desirous of adding a few remarks before

dismissing the subject of the present chapter.

We might undoubtedly have established the theory of Primary Propositions

upon the simple notion of space, in the same way as that of secondary

propositions has been established upon the notion of time. Perhaps, had this

been done, the analogy which we are contemplating would have been in

somewhat closer accordance with the view of those who regard space and

time as merely " forms of the human understanding," conditions of

knowledge imposed by the very constitution of the mind upon all that is

submitted to its apprehension. But this view, while on the one hand it is

incapable of demonstration, on the other hand ties us down to the recognition

of " place," TO rroii, as an essential category of existence. The question,

indeed, whether it is so or not, lies, I apprehend, beyond the reach of our

faculties; but it may be, and I conceive has been, established, that the formalprocesses of reasoning in primary propositions do not require, as an essential

condition, the manifestation in space of the things about which we reason;

that they would remain applicable, with equal strictness of demonstration, to

forms of existence, if such there be, which lie beyond the realm of sensible

extension. It is a fact, perhaps, in some degree analogous to this, that we are

able in many known examples in geometry and dynamics, to exhibit the

formal analysis of problems founded upon some intellectual conception of

space different from that which is presented to us by the senses, or which can

be realized by the imagination.* I conceive, therefore, that the idea of space is

not essential to the development of a theory of primary propositions, but am

disposed, though desiring to speak with diffidence upon a question of such

extreme difficulty, to think that the idea of time is essential to the

establishment of a theory of secondary propositions. There seem to be

grounds for thinking, that without any change in those faculties which are

concerned in reasoning, the manifestation of space to the human mind might

have been different from what it is, but not (at least the same) grounds for

supposing that the manifestation of time could have been otherwise than we

perceive it to be. Dismissing, however, these speculations as possibly not

altogether free from presumption, let it be affirmed that the real ground upon

which the symbol 1 represents in primary propositions the universe of things,

and not the space they occupy, is, that the sign of identity = connecting the

members of the corresponding equations, implies that the things which they

represent are identical, not simply that they are found in the same portion of

space. Let it in like manner be affirmed, that the reason why the symbol 1 in

secondary propositions represents, not the universe of events, but the eternity

in whose successive moments and periods they are evolved, is, that the same

sign of identity connecting the logical members of the corresponding

equations implies, not that the events which those members represent are

identical, but that the times of their occurrence are the same. These reasons

appear to me to be decisive of the immediate question of interpretation. In a

former treatise on this subject (Mathematical Analysis of Logic, p. 49),

following the theory of Wallis respecting the Reduction of Hypothetical

Propositions, I was led to interpret the symbol 1 in secondary propositions as

the universe of" cases" or " conjunctures of circumstances;" but this view

involves the necessity of a definition of what is meant by a "case," or "

conjuncture of circumstances;" and it is certain, that whatever is involved in

the term beyond the notion of time is alien to the objects, and restrictive ofthe processes, of formal Logic.

      * Space is presented to us in perception, as possessing the three

    dimensions of length, breadth, and depth. But in a large class of

    problems relating to the properties of curved surfaces, the rotations of

    solid bodies around axes, the vibrations of elastic media, &c, this

    limitation appears in the analytical investigation to be of an arbitrary

    character, and if attention were paid to the processes of solution alone,

    no reason could be discovered why space should not exist in four or in

    any greater number of dimensions. The intellectual procedure in the

    imaginary world thus suggested can be apprehended by the clearest light

    of analogy.

      The existence of space in three dimensions, and the views thereupon

    of the

    religious and philosophical mind of antiquity, are thus set forth by

    Aristotle:

    MtytSoc li rb fi,v iQ ?v, ypaupLrj, rb I' iiri Sio liriiriSov, rb S' iiri rpia

    a&iuf Kai 7rapd ravra oiK iariv dXXo fiiyiBoQ, Sia rb rpia iravra clvai

    Kai rb 7-pic travry. KaBavrip yap paai Kai oi TlvBayopttoi, rb irav Kai

    ra iravra role rpiuiv iipiarai. TiXtvrrj yap Kai fiiaov Kai dpxr j Tbv
                    Tv
    dpiO/iov ,x" ° Toi 7ravrof" ravra Sl rbv rtjQ rpiaSoc. Atb irapa rijc

    fvtrttjQ itKrjtportQ ioairtp VOUOVQ t2eciv,/c, KUI trpocrdc aytariiaQ

    \ino)i(0a r!iv 6iCiv rij> tipiBptf rovrif.—De Calo, i.  CHAPTER XII.

OF THE METHODS AND PROCESSES TO BE ADOPTED IN THE

TREATMENT OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS.

1. TT has appeared from previous researches (XI. 7) that the -*- laws of

combination of the literal symbols of Logic are the same, whether those

symbols are employed in the expression of primary or in that of secondary

propositions, the sole existing difference between the two cases being a

difference of interpretation. It has also been established (V. 6), that whenever

distinct systems of thought and interpretation are connected with the same

system of formal laws, i. e., of laws relating to the combination and use of

symbols, the attendant processes, intermediate between the expression of the

primary conditions of a problem and the interpretation of its symbolical

solution, are the same in both. Hence, as between the systems of thought

manifested in the two forms of primary and of secondary propositions, this

community of formal law exists, the processes which have been established

and illustrated in our discussion of the former class of propositions will,

without any modification, be applicable to the latter.

2. Thus the laws of the two fundamental processes of elimination and

development are the same in the system of secondary as in the system of

primary propositions. Again, it has been seen (Chap. vI. Prop. 2) how, in

primary propositions, the interpretation of any proposed equation devoid of

fractional forms may be effected by developing it into a series of constituents,

and equating to 0 every constituent whose coefficient does not vanish. To the

equations of secondary propositions the same method is applicable, and the

interpreted result to which it finally conducts us is, as in the former case (VI.

6), a system of co-existent denials. But while in the former case the force of

those denials is expended upon the existence of certain classes of things, in

the latter it relates to the truth of certain combinations of the elementary

propositions involved in the terms of the given premises. And as in primary

propositions it was seen that the system of denials admitted of conversion

into various other forms of propositions (VI. 7), &c., such conversion will be

found to be possible here also, the sole difference consisting not- in the forms

of the equations, but in the nature of their interpretation.

3. Moreover, as in primary propositions, we can find the expression of any

element entering into a system of equations, in terms of the remainingelements (VI. 10), or of any selected number of the remaining elements, and

interpret that expression into a logical inference, the same object can be

accomplished by the same means, difference of interpretation alone excepted,

in the system of secondary propositions. The elimination of those elements

which we desire to banish from the final solution, the reduction of the system

to a single equation, the algebraic solution and the mode of ite development

into an interprctable form, differ in no respect from the corresponding steps

in the discussion of primary propositions.

To remove, however, any possible difficulty, it may be desirable to collect

under a general Rule the different cases which present themselves in the

treatment of secondary propositions.

  RULE.—Express symbolically the given propositions (XI. 11).

  Eliminate separately from each equation in which it isfoUnd the indefinite

symbol v (VII. 5).

  Eliminate the remaining symbols which it is desired to banish from the

final solution: always before elimination reducing to a single equation those

equations in which the symbol or symbols to be eliminated are found (VIII.

7). Collect the resulting equations into a single equation V= 0.

  Then proceed according to the particular form in which it is desired to

express the final relation, as—

1st. If in the form of a denial, or system of denials, develop the function V,

and equate to 0 all those constituents whose coefficients do not vanish.

  2ndly. If in the form of a disjunctive proposition, equate to 1 the sum of

those constituents whose coffiecients vanish.

3rdly. Jfin the form of a conditional proposition having a simpie element,

as x or 1 - x, for its antecedent, determine the algebraic expression of that

element, and develop that expression.

4thly. If in the form of a conditional proposition having a compound

expression, as xy, xy + (1 -x) (1 -y), Sfc.,for its antecedent, equate that

expression to a new symbol t, and determine t as a developed function of the.

symbols which are to appear in the consequent, either by ordinary methods

or by the special method (IX. 9).5thly. Interpret the results by (XI. 13, 14).

If it only be desired to ascertain whether a particular elementary

proposition x is true or false, we must eliminate all the symbols but x; then

the equation x=l will indicate that the proposition is true, x = 0 that it is

false, 0 = 0 that the premises are insufficient to determine whether it is true

or false.

4. EX.1.—The following prediction is made the subject of a carious

discussion in Cicero's fragmentary treatise, De Fato:— "Si quis (Fabius)

natus est oriente Canicula, is in man non morietur." I shall apply to it the

method of this chapter. Let y represent the proposition, "Fabius was born at

the rising of the dogstar;" x the proposition, "Fabius will die in the sea." In

saying that x represents the proposition, "Fabius, &c.," it is only meant that x

is a symbol so appropriated (XI. 7) to the above proposition, that the equation

x - 1 declares, and the equation x = 0 denies, the truth of that proposition. The

equation we have to discuss will be

y = v(l-x). (1)

And, first, let it be required to reduce the given proposition to a negation or

system of negations (XII. 3). We have, on transposition,

                                  y — v (1 - x) = 0.

Eliminating v,

                                  jr {jr - (1 - *)} - o.

or, y-y(l-x) = 0,

or, yx = 0. (2)

The interpretation of this result is:—" It is not true that Fabius was born at the

rising of the dogstar, and will die in the sea." Cicero terms this form of

proposition, "Conjunctio ex repugnantibus;" and he remarks that Chrysippus

thought in this way to evade the difficulty which he imagined to exist in

contingent assertions respecting the future: " Hoc loco Chrysippus a:stuans

falli sperat Chaldeos ceterosque divinos, neque eos usuros esse

conjunctionibus ut ita sua percepta pronuntient: Si quis natus est oriente

Canicula is in mari non morietur; sed potius ita dicant: Non et natus est quis

oriente Canicula, et in mari morietur. O licentiam jocularem 1 . . . . Multagenera sunt enuntiandi, nee ullum distortius quam hoc quo Chrysippus sperat

Chaldeos contentos Stoicorum causa fore."—Cic. De Fato, 7, 8.

5. To reduce the given proposition to a disjunctive form. The constituents not

entering into the first member of (2) are

x(l-y), 0-x)y, (l-*)(l-y).

Whence we have

jr(l-«) + *(l-y) + (l-«)(l-y)-l. (3)

The interpretation of which is :—Either Fabius was born at the rising of the

dogstar, and will not perish in the sea; or he was not horn at the rising of the

dogstar, and will perish in the sea; or he was not born at the rising of the

dogstar, and will not perish in the sea.

In cases like the above, however, in which there exist constituents differing

from each other only by a single factor, it is, as we have seen (VII. 15), most

convenient to collect such constituents into a single term. If we thus connect

the first and third terms of (3), we have

(1 -y)ar + 1 - * = 1;

and if we similarly connect the second and third, we have y(l-«)+l-y-l.

These forms of the equation severally give the interpretations— Either

Fabius was not born under the dogstar, and will die in

the sea, or he will not die in the sea.

  Either Fabius was born under the dogstar, and will not die in

the sea, or he was not born under the dogstar.

It is evident that these interpretations are strictly equivalent to the former

one.

Let us ascertain, in the form of a conditional proposition, the consequences

which flow from the hypothesis, that "Fabius will perish in the sea."

In the equation (2), which expresses the result of the elimination of v from

the original equation, we must seek to determine x as a function of y.

We have                          a; = - = 0y + -(l-y)on expansion,

if

the interpretation of which is,—If Fabius shall die in the sea, he was not born

at the rising of the dogstar.

  These examples serve in some measure to illustrate the connexion which

has been established in the previous sections between primary and secondary

propositions, a connexion of which the two distinguishing features are

identity of process and analogy of interpretation.

6. EX. 2.—There is a remarkable argument m the second book of the

Republic of Plato, the design of which is to prove the immutability of the

Divine Nature. It is a very fine example both of the careful induction from

familiar instances by which Plato arrives at general principles, and of the

clear and connected logic by which he deduces from them the particular

inferences which it is his object to establish. The argument is contained in the

following dialogue:

  "Must not that which departs from its proper form be changed either by

itself or by another thing? Necessarily so. Are not things which are in the best

state least changed and disturbed, as the body by meats and drinks, and

labours, and every species of plant by heats and winds, and such like

affections? Is not the healthiest and strongest the least changed? Assuredly.

And does not any trouble from without least disturb and change that soul

which is strongest and wisest? And as to all made vessels, and furnitures, and

garments, according to the same principle, arc not those which are well

wrought, and in a good condition, least changed by time and other accidents?

Even so. And whatever is in a right state, either by nature or by art, or by

both these, admits of the smallest change from any other thing. So it seems.

But God and things divine are in every sense in the best state. Assuredly. In

this way, then, God should least of all bear many forms? Least, indeed, of all.

Again, should He transform and change Himself? Manifestly He must do so,

if He is changed at all. Changes He then Himself to that which is more good

and fair, or to that which is worse and baser? Necessarily to the worse, if he

be changed. For never shall we say that God is indigent of beauty or of virtue.

You speak most rightly, said I, and the matter being so, seems it to you, O

Adimantus, that God or man willingly makes himself in any sense worse?

Impossible, said he. Impossible, then, it is, said I, that a god should wish tochange himself; but ever being fairest and best, each of them ever remains

absolutely in the same form."

The premises of the above argument are the following:

1st. If the Deity suffers change, He is changed either by Himself or by

another.

2nd. If He is in the best state, He is not changed by another.

3rd. The Deity is in the best state.

4th. If the Deity is changed by Himself, He is changed to a worse state.

5th. If He acts willingly, He is not changed to a worse state.

6th. The Deity acts willingly.

Let us express the elements of these premises as follows:


    Let x represent the proposition, "The Deity suffers change." 

    y, He is changed by Himself. 

     z, He is changed by another. 

      s, He is in the best state. 

        t, He is changed to a worse state. 

    w, He acts willingly. 


Then the premises expressed in symbolical language yield, after elimination

of the indefinite class symbols v, the following equations:

ay* + *(l-y)(l-*)«0, (1)

Sz = 0, (2)

* =1, (3)

  3,(1-0 = 0, (4)

V>t - 0, (5)

w = 1. (6)

Retaining x, I shall eliminate in succession z, s, y, t, and w (this being the

order in which those symbols occur in the above system), and interpret the

successive results. Eliminating z from (1) and (2), we get  »(l-y) = 0. (7)

  Eliminating s from (3) and (7),

  *(l-y)-0. (8)

  Eliminating y from (4) and (8),

*(l-0 = 0- (9)

  Eliminating t from (5) and (9),

xw = 0. (10)

  Eliminating w from (6) and (10),

* = 0. (11)

  These equations, beginning with (8), give the following

results:

  From (8) we have x = - y, therefore, If the Deity suffers change, He is

changed by Himself.

  From (9), x = — t, If the Deity suffers change, He is changed to a worse

state.

  From (10), x = - (1 - to). If the Deity suffers change, He

does not act willingly.

  From (11), The Deity does not suffer change. This is Plato's result.

Now I have before remarked, that the order of elimination is indifferent.

Let us in the present case seek to verify this fact by eliminating the same

symbols in a reverse order, beginning with to. The resulting equations are,

t = 0, y = 0, x (1 - z) = 0, r = 0, x = 0; yielding the following interpretations:

  GOG? is not changed to a worse state.

He is not changed by Himself.

If He suffers change, He is changed by another.

He is not changed by another.

He is not changed.We thus reach by a different route the same conclusion.

  Though as an exhibition of the power of the method, the above examples

are of slight value, they serve as well as more complicated instances would

do, to illustrate its nature and character.

7. It may be remarked, as a final instance of analogy between the system of

primary and that of secondary propositions, that in the latter system also the

fundamental equation,

x (1 - x) = 0, admits of interpretation. It expresses the axiom, A proposition

cannot at the same time be true and false. Let this be compared with the

corresponding interpretation (III. 15). Solved under the form

0 0

x — - x,

1 -x 0

by development, it furnishes the respective axioms: "A thing is what it is:" "If

a proposition is true, it is true:" forms of what has been termed "The principle

of identity." Upon the nature and the value of these axioms the most opposite

opinions have been entertained. Some have regarded them as the very pith

and marrow of philosophy. Locke devoted to them a chapter, headed, "On

Trifling Propositions."* In both these views there seems to have been a

mixture of truth and error. Regarded as supplanting experience, or as

furnishing materials for the vain and wordy janglings of the schools, such

propositions are worse than trifling. Viewed, on the other hand, as intimately

allied with the very laws and conditions of thought, they rise into at least a

speculative importance.

      * Essay on the Human Understanding, Book IV. Chap. viii.  

CHAPTER XIIL
ANALYSIS OF A PORTION OF DR. SAMUEL CLARKE'S

"DEMONSTRATION OF THE BEING AND ATTRIBUTES OF GOD,"

AND OF A PORTION OF THE "ETHICA ORDINE GEOMETRICO

DEMON8TRATA" OF SPINOZA.

    r,
1 . THE general order which, in the investigations of the fol-*- lowing

chapter, I design to pursue, is the following. I shall examine what are the

actual premises involved in the demonstrations of some of the general

propositions of the above treatises, whether those premises be expressed or

implied. By the actual premises I mean whatever propositions are assumed in

the course of the argument, without being proved, and are employed as parts

of the foundation upon which the final conclusion is built. The premises thus

determined, I shall express in the language of symbols, and I shall then

deduce from them by the methods developed in the previous chapters of this

work, the most important inferences which they involve, in addition to the

particular inferences actually drawn by the authors. I shall in some instances

modify the premises by the omission of some fact or principle which is

contained in them, or by the addition or substitution of some new proposition,

and shall determine how by such change the ultimate conclusions are

affected. In the pursuit of these objects it will not devolve upon me to inquire,

except incidentally, how far the metaphysical piinciples laid down in these

celebrated productions are worthy of confidence, but only to ascertain what

conclusions may justly be drawn from given premises; and in doing this, to

exemplify the perfect liberty which we possess as concerns both the choice

and the order of the elements of the final or concluding propositions, viz., as

to determining what elementary propositions are true or false, and what are

true or false under given restrictions, or in given combinations.

2. The chief practical difficulty of this inquiry will consist,

not In the application of the method to the premises once determined, but in

ascertaining what the premises are. In what are regarded as the most rigorousexamples of reasoning applied to metaphysical questions, it will occasionally

be found that different trains of thought are blended together; that particular

but essential parts of the demonstration are given parenthetically, or out of

the main course of the argument; that the meaning of a premiss may be in

some degree ambiguous; and, not unfrequently, that arguments, viewed by

the strict laws of formal reasoning, are incorrect or inconclusive. The

difficulty of determining and distinctly exhibiting the true premises of a

demonstration may, in such cases, be very considerable. But it is a difficulty

which must be overcome by all who would ascertain whether a particular

conclusion is proved or not, whatever form they may be prepared or disposed

to give to the ulterior process of reasoning. It is a difficulty, therefore, which

is not peculiar to the method of this work, though it manifests itself more

distinctly in connexion with this method than with any other. So intimate,

indeed, is this connexion, that it is impossible, employing the method of this

treatise, to form even a conjecture as to the validity of a conclusion, without a

distinct apprehension and exact statement of all the premises upon which it

rests. In the more usual course of procedure, nothing is, however, more

common than to examine some of the steps of a train of argument, and thence

to form a vague general impression of the scope of the whole, without any

such preliminary and thorough analysis of the premises which it involves.

The necessity of a rigorous determination of the real premises of a

demonstration ought not to be regarded as an evil; especially as, when that

task is accomplished, every source of doubt or ambiguity is removed. In

employing the method of this treatise, the order in which premises arc

arranged, the mode of connexion which they exhibit, with every similar

circumstance, may be esteemed a matter of indifference, and the process of

inference is conducted with a precision which might almost be termed

mechanical.

3. The "Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God," consists of a

series of propositions or theorems, each of them proved by means of premises

resolvable, for the most part, Into two distinct classes, viz., facts of

observation, such as the existence of a material world, the phenomenon of

motion, &c., and hypothetical principles, the authority and universality of

which are supposed to be recognised a priori. It is, of course, upon the truth

of the latter, assuming the correctness of the reasoning, that the validity of the

demonstration really depends. But whatever may be thought of its claims inthis respect, it is unquestionable that, as an intellectual performance, ita

merits are very high. Though the trains of argument of which it consists are

not in general very clearly arranged, they are almost always specimens of

correct Logic, and they exhibit a subtlety of apprehension and a force of

reasoning which have seldom been equalled, never perhaps surpassed. We

see in them the consummation of those intellectual efforts which were

awakened in the realm of metaphysical inquiry, at a period when the

dominion of hypothetical principles was less questioned than it now is, and

when the rigorous demonstrations of the newly risen school of mathematical

physics seemed to have furnished a model for their direction. They appear to

me for this reason (not to mention the dignity of the subject of which they

treat) to be deserving of high consideration; and I do not deem it a vain or

superfluous task to expend upon some of them a careful analysis.

4. The Ethics of Benedict Spinoza is a treatise, the object of which is to

prove the identity of God and the universe, and to establish, upon this

doctrine, a system of morals and of philosophy. The analysis of its main

argument is extremely difficult, owing not to the complexity of the separate

propositions which it involves, but to the use of vague definitions, and of

axioms which, through a like defect of clearness, it is perplexing to determine

whether we ought to accept or to reject. While the reasoning of Dr. Samuel

Clarke is in part verbal, that of Spinoza is so in a much greater degree; and

perhaps this is the reason why, to some minds, it has appeared to possess a

formal cogency, to which in reality it possesses no just claim. These points

will, however, be considered in the proper place.


              CLARKE'S DEMONSTRATION. 

                 PROPOSITION I. 

    5. "Something has existed from eternity." 


The proof is as follows :—

"For since something now is, 'tis manifest that something always was.

Otherwise the things that now are must have risen out of nothing, absolutely

and without cause. Which is a plain contradiction in terms. For to say a thing

is produced, and yet that there is no cause at all of that production, is to say

that something is effected when it is effected by nothing, that is, at the same

time when it is not effected at all. Whatever exists has a cause of itsexistence, either in the necessity of its own nature, and thus it must have been

of itself eternal: or in the will of some other being, and then that other being

must, at least in the order of nature and causality, have existed before it."

Let us now proceed to analyze the above demonstration. Its first sentence

is resolvable into the following propositions:

1st. Something is.

2nd. If something is, either something always was, or the things that now

are must have risen out of nothing.

The next portion of the demonstration consists of a proof that the second of

the above alternatives, viz., " The things that now are have risen out of

nothing," is impossible, and it may formally be resolved as follows:

3rd. If the things that now are have risen out of nothing, something has

been effected, and at the same time that something has been effected by

nothing.

4th. If that something has been effected by nothing, it has not been effected

at all.

The second portion of this argument appears to be a mere assumption of

the point to be proved, or an attempt to make that point clearer by a different

verbal statement.

The third and last portion of the demonstration contains a distinct proof of

the truth of either the original proposition to be proved, viz., "Something

always was," or the point proved in the second part of the demonstration, viz.,

the untenable nature of the hypothesis, that "the things that now are have

risen out of nothing." It is resolvable as follows:—

5th. If something is, either it exists by the necessity of its own nature, or it

exists by the will of another being.

6th. If it exists by the necessity of its own nature, something always was.

7th. If it exists by the will of another being, then the proposition, that the

things which exist have arisen out of nothing, is false.

The last proposition is not expressed in the same form in the text of Dr.

Clarke; but his expressed conclusion of the prior existence of another Being

is clearly meant as equivalent to a denial of the proposition that the thingswhich now are have risen out of nothing.

It appears, therefore, that the demonstration consists of two distinct trains

of argument: one of those trains comprising what I have designated as the

first and second parts of the demonstration; the other comprising the first and

third parts. Let us consider the latter train.

The premises are :—

1st. Something is.

2nd. If something is, either something always was, or the things that now

are have risen out of nothing.

3rd. If somethins is, either it exists in the necessity of its own nature, or it

exists by the will of another being.

4th. If it exists in the necessity of its own nature, something always was.

5th. If it exists by the will of another being, then the hypothesis, that the

things which now are have risen out of nothing, is false.

We must now express symbolically the above proposition.

Let x = Something is.

y = Something always was.

z = The things which now are have risen from

nothing. p = It exists in the necessity of its own nature

(i.e. the something spoken of above). q = It exists by the will of another

Being.

It must be understood, that by the expression, Let x •* "Something is," is

meant no more than that x is the representative symbol of that proposition

(XI. 7), the equations x = 1, x = 0, respectively declaring its truth and its

falsehood. The equations of the premises are:—

1st. x = 1;

2nd. x - v [y (1-*) + s(l -y))\

3rd. x ■ v |p(1 - q) + q(1 -p)}',

4th. p = vy;5th. q = v(l - z);

and on eliminating the several indefinite symbols «, we have

                                                                              l-x = 0; (I)

  *{y*+(l-y)(l-*)}=0s (2)

  *{w + 0-j,)0-?))-°; (3)


                                                                            P(i-y) = 0; (4)

                                                                            qz = 0. ■ (5)

6. First, I shall examine whether any conclusions are deducible from the

above, concerning the truth or falsity of the single propositions represented

by the symbols y, z, p, q, yiz., of the propositions, " Something always was ;"

"The things which now arc have risen from nothing;" "The something which

i3 exists by the necessity of its own nature;" "The something which is exists

by the will of another being."

For this purpose we must separately eliminate all the symbols but y, all

these but z, &c. The resulting equation will determine whether any such

separate relations exist.

To eliminate x from (1), (2), and (3), it is only necessary to substitute in (2)

and (3) the value of x derived from (1). We find as the results,

yz + (l-y)(l-z) = 0. (6)

pq + (l-p){l-q)-0. (7)

To eliminate p we have from (4) and (7), by addition,

p(l-y)+pq + (l-p)(l-q)=0; (8)

whence we find,

                        (l-y)(l-y)-0. (9) To eliminate q from (5) and (9), we have

                                  P + (i-jr)(r-?)-'o;

whence we find

z(l-y) = 0. (10)

  There now remain but the two equations (6) and (10), which, on addition,give

                                    yz + 1 - y = 0.

  Eliminating from this equation z, we have

l-y-0, or, y-1. (11)

  Eliminating from the same equation y, we have

z = 0. » (12)

The interpretation of (11) is


                Something always was. 

    The interpretation of (12) is 


  The things which are have not risen from nothing.

Next resuming the system (6), (7), with the two equations (4), (5), let us

determine the two equations involving p and q respectively.

To eliminate y we have from (4) and (6),

p(l-y) + y* + (l-y)(l-*)-(0);

whence (p + 1 - z) z = 0, or, pz = 0. (13)

To eliminate z from (5) and (13), we have

qz + pz = 0; whence we get,

                                        0 = 0.

  There remains then but the equation (7), from which eliminating q, we

have 0 = 0 for the final equation, in p.

  Hence there is no conclusion derivable from the premises affirming the

simple truth or falsehood of the proposition, "The something which is exists

in the necessity of its own nature." And as, on eliminating p, there is the same

result, 0=0, for the ultimate equation in q, it also follows, that there is no

conclusion deducible from the premises as to the simple truth or falsehood of

the proposition, " The something which is exists by the will of another Being."

Of relations connecting more than one of the propositions represented by

the elementary symbols, it is needless to consider any but that which isdenoted by the equation (7) connecting /; and q, inasmuch as the propositions

represented by the remaining symbols are absolutely true or false

independently of any connexion of the kind here spoken of. The

interpretation of (7), placed under the form

p(l-q) + ? (1-/0-1, is,

  The something which is, either exists in the necessity of its own nature, or

by the will of another being.

I have exhibited the details of the above analysis with a, perhaps, needless

fulness and prolixity, because in the examples which will follow, I propose

rather to indicate the steps by which results are obtained, than to incur the

danger of a wearisome frequency of repetition. The conclusions which have

resulted from the above application of the method are easily verified by

ordinary reasoning.

The reader will have no difficulty in applying the method to the other train

of premises involved in Dr. Clarke's first Proposition, and deducing from

them the two first of the conclusions to which the above analysis has led.

  PROPOSITION II.

7. Some one unchangeable and independent Being has existed from

eternity.

The premises from which the above proposition is proved are the

following:

1st. Something has always existed.

2nd. If something has always existed, either there has existed some one

unchangeable and independent being, or the whole of existing things has

been comprehended in a succession of changeable and dependent beings.

3rd. If the universe has consisted of a succession of changeable and

dependent beings, either that series has had a cause from without, or it has

had a cause from within.

4th. It has not had a cause from without (because it includes, by

hypothesis, all things that exist).

5th. It has not had a cause from within (because no part is necessary, and if

no part is necessary, the whole cannot be necessary).  Omitting, merely for brevity, the subsidiary proofs contained in the

parentheses of the fourth and fifth premiss, we may represent the premises as

follows:

Let x = Something has always existed.


    y = There has existed some one unchangeable and in- 

     dependent being. 

    z = There has existed a succession of changeable and 


      dependent beings. 

    p = That series has had a cause from without. 

    q = That series has had a cause from within. 


  Then we have the following system of equations, viz.:

1st. x = 1;

                          2nd. x = v [y (1 - z) + z (1 - y)};

                            3rd. z = v[p(l-q) + (l-p)q);

4th. p = 0;

5th. q = 0:

which, on the separate elimination of the indefinite symbols v, gives

l-a; = 0; (1)'

x{yz + (l-)(l-z))-0; (2)
        9

                      3
  %+0-p)(l-?))-<»i ()

P-0; (4)

q = 0. (5)

The elimination from the above system of x, p, q, and y, conducts to the

equation

                                        z = 0.

And the elimination of a;, p, q, and z, conducts in a similar manner to the

equation                                          y-l.

Of which equations the respective interpretations are:

1st. The whole of existing things has not been comprehended

in a succession of changeable and dependent beings.

2nd. There has existed some one unchangeable and independent

The latter of these is the proposition which Dr. Clarke proves. As, by the

above analysis, all the propositions represented by the literal symbols x, y, z,

p, q, are determined as absolutely true or false, it is needless to inquire into

the existence of any further relations connecting those propositions together.

  Another proof is given of Prop, n., which for brevity I pass over. It may be

observed, that the "impossibility of infinite succession," the proof of which

forms a part of Clarke's argument, has commonly been assumed as a

fundamental principle of metaphysics, and extended to other questions than

that of causation. Aristotle applies it to establish the necessity of first

principles of demonstration ;* the necessity of an end (the good), in human

actions, &c.f There is, perhaps, no principle more frequently referred to in his

writings. By the schoolmen it was similarly applied to prove the impossibility

of an infinite subordination of genera and species, and hence the necessary

existence of universals. Apparently the impossibility of our forming a definite

and complete conception of an infinite series, i. e. of comprehending it as a

whole, has been confounded with a logical inconsistency, or contradiction in

the idea itself.

8. The analysis of the following argument depends upon the theory of

Primary Propositions.


                 PROPOSITION III. 

    That unchangeable and independent Being must be self-existent. 


The premises arc:—

1. Every being must either have come into existence out of nothing, or it

must have been produced by some external cause, or it must be self-existent.

2. No being has come into existence out of nothing.

3. The unchangeable and independent Being has not been produced by anexternal cause.

For the symbolical expression of the above, let us assume, \


    • Metaphysics, III. 4 ; Anal. Post. I. 19, et *eq. 

    t Nic. Ethics, Book I. Cap. II. 


x = Beings which have arisen out of nothing.

y = Beings which have been produced by an external


       cause. 

    z = Beings which are self-existent. 

    w = The unchangeable and independent Being. 


  Then we have

*(1 -y) (1 - z) + y (1 - x) (1 - z) + *(1 - *) (1 -y) - 1, (1)

x = 0, * (2)

w = v(l-y), (3)

from the last of which eliminating v,

wy = 0. (4)

Whenever, as above, the value of a symbol is given as 0 or 1, it is best

eliminated by simple substitution. Thus the elimination of x gives

y(l-*) + *(l-y)-l; (5)

or, yz + (1 - y) (1 - z) = 0. (6)

Now adding (4) and (6), and eliminating y, wc get

w(l -z) = 0,

... w = vz;

the interpretation of which is,— The unchangeable and independent being is

necessarily self-existing.

Of (5), in its actual form, the interpretation is,—Every being has either

been produced by an external cause, or it is self-existent.9- In Dr. Samuel Clarke's observations on the above proposition occurs a

remarkable argument, designed to prove that the material world is not the

self-existent being above spoken of. The passage to which I refer is the

following:

"If matter be supposed to exist necessarily, then in that necessary existence

there is cither included the power of gravitation, or not. If not, then in a world

merely material, and in which no intelligent being presides, there never could

have been any motion; because motion, as has been already shown, and is

now granted in the question, is not necessary of itself. But if the power of

gravitation be included in the pretended necessary existence of matter: then, it

following necessarily that there must be a vacuum (as the incomparable Sir

Isaac Newton has abundantly demonstrated that there must, if gravitation be

an universal quality or affection of matter), it follows likewise, that matter is

not a necessary being. For if a vacuum actually be, then it is plainly more

than possible for matter not to be."— (pp. 25, 26).

It will, upon attentive examination, be found that the actual premises

involved in'the above demonstration are the following:

1st. If matter is a necessary being, either the property of gravitation is

necessarily present, or it is necessarily absent.

2nd. If gravitation is necessarily absent, and the world is not subject to any

presiding Intelligence, motion does not exist.

3rd. If the property of gravitation is necessarily present, the existence of a

vacuum is necessary.

4th. If the existence of a vacuum is necessary, matter is not a necessary

being.

5th. If matter is a necessary being, the world is not subject to a presiding

Intelligence.

6th. Motion exists.

Of the above premises the first four are expressed in the demonstration; the

fifth is implied in the connexion of its first and second sentences; and the

sixth expresses a fact, which the author does not appear to have thought it

necessary to state, but which is obviously a part of the ground of his

reasoning. Let us represent the elementary propositions in the followingmanner:

Let x = Matter is a necessary being.

y = Gravitation is necessarily present.

t = Gravitation is necessarily absent.

z = The world is merely material, and not subject to


      any presiding Intelligence. 

    w = Motion exists. 

    v = A vacuum is necessary. 


Then the system of premises will be represented by the following equations,

in which q is employed as the symbol of time indefinite:

                                    * = ?{y0 -0 + 0-JO'}.

te= q{l - w).

y = qv.


    v = 9(l - x). 

    x = qz. 

    w = 1. 


From which, if we eliminate the symbols q, we have the following system,

viz.:

  *{j*+(l-y)(l-<)}«0. (1)

tzw = 0. (2)

y(l-»)«0. (3)

ux = 0. (4)

x(l-z) = 0. (5)

1 - w = 0. (6)

Now if from these equations we eliminate w, v, z, y, and t, we obtain the

equation

                                        x = 0,which expresses the proposition, Matter is not a necessary being. This is Dr.

Clarke's conclusion. If we endeavour to eliminate any other set of five

symbols (except the set v, z, y, t, and x, which would give to = 1), we obtain a

result of the form 0 = 0. It hence appears that there.are no other conclusions

expressive of tin- absolute truth or falsehood of any of the elementary

propositions designated by single symbols.

Of conclusions expressed by equations involving two symbols, there exists

but the following, viz.:—If the world is merely material, and not subject to a

presiding Intelligence, gravitation is not necessarily absent. This conclusion

is expressed by the equation

                            tz = 0, whence z = q (1 - t).

If in the above analysis we suppress the concluding premiss, expressing the

fact of the existence of motion, and leave the hypothetical principles which

are embodied in the remaining premises untouched, some remarkable

conclusions follow. To these I shall direct attention in the following chapter.

10. Of the remainder of Dr. Clarke's argument I shall briefly state the

substance and connexion, dwelling only on certain portiona of it which are of

a more complex character than the others, and afford better illustrations of the

method of this work.

In Prop. iV. it is shown that the substance or essence of the self-existent

being is incomprehensible. The tenor of the reasoning employed is, that we

are ignorant of the essential nature of all other things,—much more, then, of

the essence of the selfexistent being.

In Prop. V. it is contended that "though the substance or essence of the

self-existent being is itself absolutely incomprehensible to us, yet many of the

essential attributes of his nature are strictly demonstrable, as well as his

existence."

In Prop. vI. it is argued that "the self-existent being must of necessity be

infinite and omnipresent;" and it is contended that his infinity must be "an

infinity of fulness as well as of immensity." The ground upon which the

demonstration proceeds is, that an absolute necessity of existence must be

independent of time, place, and circumstance, free from limitation, and

therefore excluding all imperfection. And hence it is inferred that the self-

existent being must be "a most simple, unchangeable, incorruptible being,without parts, figure, motion, or any other such properties as we find in

matter."

The premises actually employed may be exhibited as follows:

1. If a finite being is self-existent, it is a contradiction to suppose it not to

exist.

2. A finite being may, without contradiction, be absent from one place.

3. That which may without contradiction be absent from one place may

without contradiction be absent from all places.

4. That which may without contradiction be absent from all places may

without contradiction be supposed not to exist.


    Let us assume 

 x = Finite beings. 

 y = Things self-existent. 


    z = Things which it is a contradiction to suppose not to exist. 

    w = Things which may be absent without contradiction from 


one place. t = Things which without contradiction may be absent from

every place.

We have on expressing the above, and eliminating the indefinite

symbols,

xy(l-z) = Q. (1)

x(l -w) = 0. (2)

w(l-t) = 0. (3)

tz = 0. (4)

Eliminating in succession t, w, and z, we get

xy = 0,

                                    ••• y - Q (i - *);

the interpretation of which is,— Whatever is self-existent is infinite.In Prop. VII. it is argued that the self-existent being must of necessity be

One. The order of the proof is, that the self-existent being is "necessarily

existent," that "necessity absolute in itself is simple and uniform, and without

any possible difference or variety," that all "variety or difference of

existence" implies dependence; and hence that " whatever exists necessarily

is the one simple essence of the self-existent being."

The conclusion is also made to flow from the following premises :—

1. If there are two or more necessary and independent beings, either of

them may be supposed to exist alone.

2. If either may be supposed to exist alone, it is not a contradiction to

suppose the other not to exist.

3. If it is not a contradiction to suppose this, there are not two necessary

and independent beings.


    Let us represent the elementary propositions as follows:— 

 x = there exist two necessary independent beings. 

 y = either may be supposed to exist alone. 

 z = it is not a contradiction to suppose the other not to exist. 


We have then, on proceeding as before,

  *(i-y) = o. (1)

y(l-*)=0. (2)

zx = 0. (3) Eliminating y and z, we have

x = 0.

Whence, There do not exist two necessary and independent beings.

11. To the premises upon which the two previous propositions rest, it is

well known that Bishop Butler, who at the time of the publication of the

"Demonstration," was a student in a nonconformist academy, made objection

in some celebrated letters, which, together with Dr. Clarke's replies to them,

are usually appended to editions of the work. The real question at issue is the

validity of the principle, that "whatsoever is absolutely necessary at all is

absolutely necessary in every part of space, and in every point of duration,"—

a principle assumed in Dr. Clarke's reasoning, and explicitly stated in hisreply to Butler's first letter. In his second communication Butler says: "I do

not conceive that the idea of ubiquity is contained in the idea of selfexistence,

or directly follows from it, any otherwise than as whatever exists must exist

somewhere." That is to say, necessary existence implies existence in some

part of space, but not in every part. It does not appear that Dr. Clarke was

ever able to dispose effectually of this objection. The whole of the

correspondence is extremely curious and interesting. The objections of Butler

are precisely those which would occur to an acute mind impressed with the

conviction, that upon the sifting of first principles, rather than upon any

mechanical dexterity of reasoning, the successful investigation of truth

mainly depends. And the replies of Dr. Clarke, although they cannot be

admitted as satisfactory, evince, in a remarkable degree, that peculiar

intellectual power which is manifest in the work from which the discussion

arose.

12. In Prop. vin. it is argued that the self-existent and original cause of all

things must be an Intelligent Being.

The main argument adduced in support of this proposition is, that as the

cause is more excellent than the effect, the selfexistent being, as the cause

and original of all things, must contain in itself the perfections of all tilings;

and that Intelligence is one of the perfections manifested in a part of the

creation. It is further argued that this perfection is not a modification of

figure, divisibility, or any of the known properties of matter; for these are not

perfections, but limitations. To this is added the d posteriori argument from

the manifestation of design in the frame of the universe.

  There is appended, however, a distinct argument for the existence of an

intelligent self-existent being, founded upon the phenomenal existence of

motion in the universe. I shall briefly exhibit this proof, and shall apply to it

the method of the present treatise.

The argument, omitting unimportant explanations, is as follows :—

"'Tis evident there is some such a thing as motion in the world; which

either began at some time or other, or was eternal. If it began in time, then the

question is granted that the first cause is an intelligent being.... On the

contrary, if motion was eternal, either it was eternally caused by some eternal

intelligent being, or it must of itself be necessary and self-existent, or else,

without any necessity in its own nature, and without any external necessarycause, it must have existed from eternity by an endless successive

communication. If motion was eternally caused by some eternal intelligent

being, this also is granting the question as to the present dispute. If it was of

itself necessary and selfexistent, then it follows that it must be a contradiction

in terms to suppose any matter to be at rest. And yet, at the same time,

because the determination of this self-existent motion must be every way at

once, the effect of it would be nothing else but a perpetual rest. ... But if it be

said that motion, without any necessity in its own nature, and without any

external necessary cause, has existed from eternity merely by an endless

successive communication, as Spinoza inconsistently enough seems to assert,

this I have before shown (in the proof of the second general proposition of

this discourse) to be a plain contradiction. It remains, therefore, that motion

must of necessity be originally caused by something that is intelligent."

The premises of the above argument may be thus disposed:

1. If motion began in time, the first cause is an intelligent

2. If motion has existed from eternity, either it has been eternally caused by

some eternal intelligent being, or it is selfexistent, or it must have existed by

endless successive communication.

3. If motion has been eternally caused by an eternal intelligent being, the

first cause is an intelligent being.

4. If it is self-existent, matter is at rest and not at rest.

5. That motion has existed by endless successive communication, and that

at the same time it is not self-existent, and has not been eternally caused by

some eternal intelligent being, is false.

To express these propositions, let us assume—

x = Motion began in time (and therefore) 1 - x = Motion has existed from

eternity. y = The first cause is an intelligent being. p = Motion has been

eternally caused by some eternal intelligent being. q = Motion is self-

existent.

r = Motion has existed by endless successive communication. * = Matter is at

rest.

The equations of the premises then are—x = vy. l-x = v{p(l-q)(\-r) + q(l-p)(l-r) + r(l-p)(l-q)}. p-vy.


    q .= vs (1 - *) = 0. 

    r(l-y) (1-/0-0. 


Since, by the fourth equation, q = 0, we obtain, on substituting for q its value

in the remaining equations, the system


    x-vy, 1 - x m v [p(l -r) + r(l -p)}, 

    p-vy, r(l-p) = 0, 


from which eliminating the indefinite symbols v, we have the final reduced

system,

  *(i-y) = o, (l)

                                2
  (l-*){pr +O-/0 (»-,-)}=•, ()

j»(l-y) = 0. (3)

r(l-p)~0. (4) We shall first seek the value of y, the symbol involved in Dr.

Clarke's conclusion. First, eliminating x from (1) and (2), we have

    (l-y){pr+(l-p)(l-r))-0. (5)

Next, to eliminate r from (4) and (5), we have

r(l-/0+(l-y) lpr + (l-/,)(l-r)}-0,

... {l-p + (l-y)p) x(l-y)(l-/>)-0; whence

  (l-y)(l-/,)-0. (6)

  Lastly, eliminating p from (3) and (6), we have

                                        l-y = 0,

                                        .-. y=h

which expresses the required conclusion, The first cause is an intelligent

being.

Let us now examine what other conclusions are deducible from the

premises.

If we substitute the value just found for y in the equations (1), (2), (3), (4),they are reduced to the following pair of equations, viz.,

  (l-*){pr + (l-p)(l-r))-0, r(l-p) = 0. (7) Eliminating from these equations x,

we have r(l -p) = 0, whence r = vp,

which expresses the conclusion, If motion has existed by endless successive

communication, it has been eternally caused by an eternal intelligent being.

  Again eliminating, from the given pair, r, we have

                                          (I-*)(1-/0-O,

or, 1 - x = vp,

which expresses the conclusion, If motion has existed from eternity, it has

been eternally caused by some eternal intelligent being. Lastly, from the

same original pair eliminating/), wc get (1 - x) r = 0, which, solved in the

form

                                      l-a; = »(l-r),

gives the conclusion, If motion has existed from eternity, it has not existed by

an endless successive communication.

  Solved under the form

r = vx,

the above equation leads to the equivalent conclusion, If motion exists by an

endless successive communication, it began in time.

13. Now it will appear to the reader that the first and last of the above four

conclusions are inconsistent with each other. The two consequences drawn

from the hypothesis that motion exists . by an endless successive

communication, viz., 1st, that it has been eternally caused by an eternal

intelligent being; 2ndly, that it began in time,—are plainly at variance.

Nevertheless, they are both rigorous deductions from the original premises.

The opposition between them is not of a logical, but of what is technically

termed a material, character. This opposition might, however, have been

formally stated in the premises. We might have added to them a formal

proposition, asserting that " whatever is eternally caused by an eternal

intelligent being, does not begin in time." Had this been done, no such

opposition as now appears in our conclusions could have presented itself.

Formal logic can only take account of relations which are formally expressed(VI. 16); and it may thus, in particular instances, become necessary to

express, in a formal manner, some connexion among the premises which,

without actual statement, is involved in the very meaning of the language

employed.

To illustrate what has been said, let us add to the equations

(2) and (4) the equation

px = 0,

which expresses the condition above adverted to. We have

(1 -x) [pr + (l-p) (1-r)) + r(l-p)+px« 0. (8) Eliminating p from this, we find

simply

r = 0, which expresses the proposition, Motion does not exist by an endless

successive communication. If now we substitute for r its value in (8), we have

(1 - x) (1 - p) t px = 0, or, 1 - x = p;

whence we have the interpretation, If motion has existed from eternity, it has

been eternally caused by an eternal intelligent being; together with the

converse of that proposition.

In Prop. iX. it is argued, that " the self-existent and original cause of all

things is not a necessary agent, but a being endued with liberty and choice."

The proof is based mainly upon his possession of intelligence, and upon the

existence of final causes, implying design and choice. To the objection that

the supreme cause operates by necessity for the production of what is best, it

is replied, that this is a necessity of fitness and wisdom, and not of nature.

14. In Prop. X. it is argued, that "the self-existent being, the supreme cause

of all things, must of necessity have infinite power." The ground of the

demonstration is, that as " all the powers of all things are derived from him,

nothing can make any difficulty or resistance to the execution of his will." It

is defined that the infinite power of the self-existent being does not extend to

the "making of a thing which implies a contradiction," or the doing of that

"which would imply imperfection (whether natural or moral) in the being to

whom such power is ascribed," but that it does extend to the creation of

matter, and of an immaterial, cogitative substance, endued with a power of

beginning motion, and with a liberty of will or choice. Upon this doctrine ofliberty it is contended that we are able to give a satisfactory answer to "that

ancient and great question, iroBiv rb KOKOV, what is the cause and original of

evil?" The argument on this head I shall briefly exhibit.

"All that we call evil is either an evil of imperfection, as the want of certain

faculties or excellencies which other creatures have; or natural evil, as pain,

death, and the like; or moral evil, as all kinds of vice. The first of these is not

properly an evil; for every power, faculty, or perfection, which any creature

enjoys, being the free gift of God, . . it is plain the want of any certain faculty

or perfection in any kind of creatures, which never belonged to their natures

is no more an evil to them, than their never having been created or brought

into being at all could properly have been called an evil. The second kind of

evil, which we call natural evil, is either a necessary consequence of the

former, as death to a creature on whose nature immortality was never

conferred; and then it is no more properly an evil than the former. Or else it is

counterpoised on the whole with as great or greater good, as the afflictions

and sufferings of good men, and then also it is not properly an evil; or else,

lastly, it is a punishment, and then it is a necessary consequence of the third

and last kind of evil, viz., moral evil. And this arises wholly from the abuse

of liberty which God gave to His creatures for other purposes, and which it

was reasonable and fit to give them for the perfection and order of the whole

creation. Only they, contrary to God's intention and command, have abused

what was necessary to the perfection of the whole, to the corruption and

depravation of themselves. And thus all sorts of evils have entered into the

world without any diminution to the infinite goodness of the Creator and

Governor thereof."—p. 112.

The main premises of the above argument may be thus stated:

1st. All reputed evil is either evil of imperfection, or natural evil, or moral

evil.

2nd. Evil of imperfection is not absolute evil.

3rd. Natural evil is either a consequence of evil of imperfection, or it is

compensated with greater good, or it is a consequence of moral evil.

4th. That which is either a consequence of evil of imperfection, or is

compensated with greater good, is not absolute evil.

5th. All absolute evils are included in reputed evils.To express these premises let us assume—

w= reputed evil.

x = evil of imperfection.

y = natural evil.

z = moral evil.

p = consequence of evil of imperfection.

                      q = compensated with greater good.

r = consequence of moral evil.

t = absolute evil.

Then, regarding the premises as Primary Propositions, of whichall the predicates are particular, and the conjunctions either, or,

as absolutely disjunctive, wo have the following cquations :

w=vlz(l-5) (1-0) +y(1-2) (1-2) + 2(1-2) (1- )}

z=v(l-1t).

y=v{p(l-9)(1-n+q(1-p)(1-r)+r(1-p) (1-9))

PA-+gl-p)=v(i-9.
L=,
From which, if we separately eliminate the symbol v, we have
w(l-z(l-y)(1-2)-y(1-2) (1-2)-z(1-2)(1-9)) =0, (1)

at=0, @)
y(1-p(l-9)(1-1)-g(1-p)(1-r)-r(1-p) (1-9)} =0, (3)
-9 +g(1-p)}t=0, [O)

t(1-w)=0. ®)

Let it be required, first, to find what conclusion the premises
wareant us in forming respecting absolute evils, as concerns their
dependence upon moral evils, and the consequences of moral
evils.

For this purpose we must determine ¢ in terms of z and .
The symbols w, 2, y, p, ¢ must therefore be climinated. The
process is casy, as any set of the equations s reducible to a single
equation by addition.

Eliminating w from (1) and (5), we have

t(1-2(1-9) (1= -y (1=0) (1=2) =2 (1-2) (1 =5)} = 0. )
The elimination of p from (3) and (4) gives

yar+yge+yt(L-n) (1-g)=0. (W]
The climination of ¢ from this gives
p(d-r=o. ®
The climination of x between (2) and (6) gives
tiyz+ (1-y) (1-2) =0, ©)

The elimination of y from (8) and (9) gives
(-2 Q-n=0.
This is the only relation existing between the elements ¢, z, and ».
‘We hence get

o
aTHacn
-J*r + jjz(l-r)+jj(l-*)r+0(l-*)(l-r)the interpretation of which is, Absolute evil is either moral evil, or it is, if not

moral evil, a consequence of moral evil.

Any of the results obtained in the process of the above solution furnish us

with interpretations. Thus from (8) we might deduce

whence, Absolute evils are either natural evils, which are the consequences

of moral evils, or they are not natural evils at all.

A variety of other conclusions may be deduced from the given equations in

reply to questions which may be arbitrarily proposed. Of such I shall give a

few examples, without exhibiting the intermediate processes of solution.

  Quest. 1.—Can any relation be deduced from the premises connecting the

following elements, viz.: absolute evils, consequences of evils of

imperfection, evils compensated with greater good?

  Ans.—No relation exists. If we eliminate all the symbols but z, p, q, the

result is 0 = 0.

  Quest. 2.—Is any relation implied between absolute evils, evils of

imperfection, and consequences of evils of imperfection.

  Ans.—The final relation between x, t, and p is

xt + pt = 0; whence

      xv
p+ x 0  ''

Therefore, Absolute evils are neither evils of imperfection, nor consequences

of evils of imperfection.

  Quest. 3.—Required the relation of natural evils to evils of

imperfection and evils compensated with greater good.

We find .

                                        pqy = 0,

Therefore, Natural evils are either consequences of evils of imperfection

which are not compensated with greater good, or they are not consequences

of evils of imperfection at all.

  Quest. 4.—In what relation do those natural evils which are not moral evils

stand to absolute evils and the consequences of moral evils?Ify(l - z) = s, we find, after elimination,


    ts(l- r) = 0; 

 0 0 0., 

                                                rl
                                    -'"nrrT:ro<V-<>

Therefore, Natural evils, which are not moral evils, are either absolute evils,

which are tlie consequences of moral evils, or they are not absolute evils at

all.

The following conclusions have been deduced in a similar manner. The

subject of each conclusion will show of what particular things a description

was required, and the predicate will show what elements it was designed to

involve:—

  Absolute evils, which are not consequences of moral evils, are moral and

not natural evils.

  Absolute evils which are not moral evils are natural evils, which are the

consequences of moral evils.

  Natural evils which are not consequences of moral evils are not absoiute

evils.

  Lastly, let us seek a description of evils which are not absolute, expressed

in terms of natural and moral evils.

We obtain as the final equation,

i-<-y* + 5y(i-*) + jJ0-y)* + (i-y) O-*)

The direct interpretation of this equation is a necessary truth, but the reverse

interpretation is remarkable. Evils which are both

                                            p

natural and moral, and evils which are neither natural nor moral, are not

absolute evih.

This conclusion, though it may not express a truth, is certainly involved in

the given premises, as formally stated.

15. Let us take from the same argument a somewhat fuller system ofpremises, and let us in those premises suppose that the particles, either, or,

are not absolutely disjunctive, so that in the meaning of the expression,

"either evil of imperfection, or natural evil, or moral evil," we include

whatever possesses one or more of these qualities.

Let the premises be —

1. All evil (w) is either evil of imperfection (x), or natural evil (y), or moral

evil (z).

2. Evil of imperfection (x) is not absolute evil (<).

3. Natural evil (y) is either a consequence of evil of imperfection (],), or it

is compensated with greater good (y), or it is a consequence of moral evil (r).

4. Whatever is a consequence of evil of imperfection (j,) is not absolute

evil (£).

5. Whatever is compensated with greater good (y) is not absolute evil (t).

6. Moral evil (z) is a consequence of the abuse of liberty («).

7. That which is a consequence of moral evil (r) is a consequence of the

abuse of liberty (a).

8. Absolute evils are included in reputed evils.

The premises expressed in the usual way give, after the elimination of the

indefinite symbols v, the following equations:

  «(l-*)(l-y)(l-*)-0, (1)

                                                                                xt = 0, (2)

y(l-p)(l-q){l-r) = 0, (3)

                                                                                pt = 0, (4)

                                                                                qt = 0, (5)

                                                                        z (1 - «) - 0, (6)

                                                                            r(l-«) = 0, (7)

                                                                        t (1 - to) = 0. (8)

Each of these equations satisfies the condition F(l - V) = 0.The following results are easily deduced—

  Natural evil is either absolute evil, which is a consequence of moral evil,

or it is not absolute evil at all.

All evils are eitlier absolute evils, which are consequences of the abuse of

liberty, or they are not absolute evils.

  Natural evils are either evils of imperfection, which are not absolute evils,

or they are not evils of imperfection at all.

A bsolute evils are either natural evils, which are consequences of die

abuse of liberty, or they are not natural evils, and at the same time not evils

of imperfection.

  Consequences of the abuse of liberty include all natural evils which are

absolute evils, and are not evils of imperfection, with an indefinite remainder

of natural evils which are not absolute, and of evils which are not natural.

16. These examples will suffice for illustration. The reader can easily

supply others if they are needed. We proceed now to examine the most

essential portions of the demonstration of Spinoza.

                                    DEFINITIONS.

1. By a cause of itself (causa sui), I understand that of which the essence

involves existence, or that of which the nature cannot be conceived except as

existing.

2. That thing is said to be finite or bounded in its own kind (in suo genere

finitd) which may be bounded by another thing of the same kind; e. g. Body

is said to be finite, because we can always conceive of another body greater

than a given one. So thought is bounded by other thought. But body is not

bounded by thought, nor thought by body.

3. By substance, I understand that which is in itself (in se), and is

conceived by itself (per se concipitur), i. e., that whose conception does not

require to be formed from the conception of another thing.

4. By attribute, I understand that which the intellect perceives in substance,

as constituting its very essence.

5. By mode, I understand the affections of substance, or that which is in

another thing, by which thing also it is conceived.6. By God, I understand the Being absolutely infinite, that is the substance

consisting of infinite attributes, each of which expresses an eternal and

infinite essence.

  Explanation.—I say absolutely infinite, not infinite in its own kind. For to

whatever is only infinite in its own kind we may deny the possession of

(some) infinite attributes. But when a thing is absolutely infinite, whatsoever

expresses essence and involves no negation belongs to its essence.

7. That thing is termed free, which exists by the sole necessity of its own

nature, and is determined to action by itself alone; necessary, or rather

constrained, which is determined by another thing to existence and action, in

a certain and determinate manner.

8. By eternity, I understand existence itself, in so far as it is conceived

necessarily to follow from the sole definition of the eternal thing.

  Explanation.—For such existence, as an eternal truth, is conceived as the

essence of the thing, and therefore cannot be explained by mere duration or

time, though the latter should be conceived as without beginning and without

end.

  AXIOMS.

1. All things which exist are either in themselves (in se) or in another

thing.

2. That which cannot be conceived by another thing ought to be conceived

by itself.

3. From a given determinate cause the effect necessarily follows, and,

contrariwise, if no determinate cause be granted, it is impossible that an effect

should follow.

4. The knowledge of the effect depends upon, and involves, the knowledge

of the cause.

5. Things which have nothing in common cannot be understood by means

of each other; or the conception of the one does not involve the conception of

the other.

6. A true idea ought to agree with its own object. (Idea vera debet cum sua

ideato convenire.)7. Whatever can be conceived as non-existing does not involve existence

in its essence.

  Other definitions are implied, and other axioms are virtually assumed, in

some of the demonstrations. Thus, in Prop, I., "Substance is prior in nature to

its affections," the proof of which consists in a mere reference to Defs. 3 and

5, there seems to be an assumption of the following axiom, viz., "That by

which a thing is conceived is prior in nature to the thing conceived." Again,

in the demonstration of Prop. V. the converse of this axiom is assumed to be

true. Many other examples of the same kind occur. It is impossible, therefore,

by the mere processes of Logic, to deduce the whole of the conclusions of the

first book of the Ethics from the axioms and definitions which are prefixed to

it, and which are given above. In the brief analysis which will follow, I shall

endeavour to present in their proper order what appear to me to be the real

premises, whether formally stated or implied, and shall show in what manner

they involve the conclusions to which Spinoza was led.

17. I conceive, then, that in the course of his demonstration, Spinoza

effects several parallel divisions of the universe of possible existence, as,

1st. Into things which are in themselves, x, and things which are in some

other thing, x; whence, as these classes of thing together make up the

universe, we have

x + of ■ 1; (AX. I.) or, x = I - af.

2nd. Into things which are conceived by themselves, y, and

things which are conceived through some other thing, y';

whence

                                  y = 1 - /. (AX. H.)

3rd. Into substance, z, and modes, z"; whence

      1
z= l - z. (Def. m. V.) 4th. Into things free,/, and things necessary,/'; whence

                                    /=1-/. (Def. vn.)

5th. Into things which are causes and self-existent, e, and tilings caused by

some other thing, e; whence

                            e = 1 - e. (Def. I. AX. vn.)And his reasoning proceeds upon the expressed or assumed principle, that

these divisions are not only parallel, but equivalent. Thus in Def. in.,

Substance is made equivalent with that which is conceived by itself; whence

  Again, AX. iV., as it is actually applied by Spinoza, establishes the identity

of cause with that by which a thing is conceived; whence

V = e.

  Again, in Def. VII., things free are identified with things self-existent;

whence

  Lastly, in Def. V., mode is made identical with that which is in another

thing; whence z" = of, and therefore,

z = x.

All these results may be collected together into the following series of

equations, viz.:

x = y = z =f= e = I - a? = 1 - y'= 1 -f'= 1 - z = 1-e.

And any two members of this series connected together by the sign of

equality express a conclusion, whether drawn by Spinoza or not, which is a

legitimate consequence of his system. Thus the equation

z = 1 - e,

expresses the sixth proposition of his system, viz., One substance cannot be

produced by another. Similarly the equation

z = e,

expresses his seventh proposition, viz., " It pertains to the nature of substance

to exist." This train of deduction it is unnecessary to pursue. Spinoza applies

it chiefly to the deduction according to his views of the properties of the

Divine Nature, having first endeavoured to prove that the only substance is

God. In the steps of this process, there appear to me to exist some fallacies,

dependent chiefly upon the ambiguous use of words, to which it will be

necessary here to direct attention.

18. In Prop. v. it is endeavoured to show, that " There cannot exist two or

more substances of the same nature or attribute." The proof is virtually as

follows: If there are more substances than one, they are distinguished eitherby attributes or modes; if by attributes, then there is only one substance of the

same attribute; if by modes, then, laying aside these as non-essential, there

remains no real ground of distinction. Hence there exists but one substance of

the same attribute. The assumptions here involved are inconsistent with those

which are found in other parts of the treatise. Thus substance, Def. iV., is

apprehended by the intellect through the means of attribute. By Def. vI. it

may have many attributes. One substance may, therefore, conceivably be

distinguished from another by a difference in some of its attributes, while

others remain the same.

In Prop. vm. it is attempted to show that, All substance is necessarily

infinite. The proof is as follows. There exists but one substance, of one

attribute, Prop. V.; and it pertains to its nature to exist, Prop. vn. It will,

therefore, be of its nature to exist either as finite or infinite. But not as finite,

for, by Def. n. it would require to be bounded by another substance of the

same nature, which also ought to exist necessarily, Prop. VII. Therefore, there

would be two substances of the same attribute, which is absurd, Prop. V.

Substance, therefore, is infinite.

In this demonstration the word " finite" is confounded with the expression,

"Finite in its own kind," Def. n. It is thus assumed that nothing can be finite,

unless it is bounded by another thing of the same kind. This is not consistent

with the ordinary meaning of the term. Spinoza's use of the term finite tends

to make space the only form of substance, and all existing things but

affections of space, and this, I think, is really one of the ultimate foundations

of his system.

The first scholium applied to the above Proposition is remarkable. I give it

in the original words: "Quuni finitum esse revera sit ex parte negatio, et

infinitum absoluta affirmatio existentie alicujus nature, sequitur ergo ex sola

Prop. vn. omnem substantiam debere esse infinitam." Now this is in reality an

assertion of the principle affirmed by Clarke, and controverted by Butler

(XIII. 11), that necessary existence implies existence in every part of space.

Probably this principle will be found to lie at the basis of every attempt to

demonstrate, d priori, the existence of an Infinite Being.

  From the general properties of substance above stated, and the definition of

God as the substance consisting of infinite attributes, the peculiar doctrines of

Spinoza relating to the Divine Nature necessarily follow. As substance isself-existent, free, causal in its very nature, the thing in which other things

are, and by which they are conceived; the same properties are also asserted of

the Deity. He is self-existent, Prop. xI.; indivisible, Prop. xni.; the only

substance, Prop. xiV.; the Being in which all things are, and by which all

things are conceived, Prop. xV.; free, Prop. xvn.; the immanent cause of all

things, Prop. xvm. The proof that God is the only substance is drawn from

Def. vI., which is interpreted into a declaration that " God is the Being

absolutely infinite, of whom no attribute which expresses the essence of

substance can be denied." Every conceivable attribute being thus assigned by

definition to Him, and it being determined in Prop. V. that there cannot exist

two substances of the same attribute, it follows that God is the only

substance.

  Though the " Ethics" of Spinoza, like a large portion of his other writings,

is presented in the geometrical form, it does not afford a good praxis for the

symbolical method of this work. Of course every train of reasoning admits,

when its ultimate premises are truly determined, of being treated by that

method; but in the present instance, such treatment scarcely differs, except in

the use of letters for words, from the processes employed in the original

demonstrations. Reasoning which consists so largely of a play upon terms

defined as equivalent, is not often met with; and it is rather on account of the

interest attaching to the subject, than of the merits of the demonstrations,

highly as by some they are esteemed, that I have devoted a few pages here to

their exposition.

19. It is not possible, I think, to rise from the perusal of the arguments of

Clarke and Spinoza without a deep conviction of the futility of all endeavours

to establish, entirely ap-iori, the existence of an Infinite Being, His attributes,

and His relation to the universe. The fundamental principle of all such

speculations, viz., that whatever we can clearly conceive, must exist, fails to

accomplish its end, even when its truth is admitted. For how shall the finite

comprehend the infinite? Yet must the possibility of such conception be

granted, and in something more than the sense of a mere withdrawal of the

limits of phenomenal existence, before any solid ground can be established

for the knowledge, a priori, of things infinite and eternal. Spinoza's

affirmation of the reality of such knowledge is plain and explicit: "Mens

humana adequatum habet cognitionem eternse et infinite essentie Dei" (Prop,

XLVII., Part 2nd). Let this be compared with Prop, xxxiV., Part 2nd: "Omnisidea quae in nobis est absoluta sive adequata et perfects, vera est;" and with

Axiom vI., Part 1st, "Idea vera debet cum suo ideato convenire." Moreover,

this species of knowledge is made the essential constituent of all other

knowledge: "De natura rationis est res sub quadam eternitatis specie

percipere" (Prop, XLIV., Cor. n., Part 2nd). Were it said, that there is a tendency

in the human mind to rise in contemplation from the particular towards the

universal, from the finite towards the infinite, from the transient towards the

eternal; and that this tendency suggests to us, with high probability, the

existence of more than sense perceives or understanding comprehends; the

statement might be accepted as true for at least a a large number of minds.

There is, however, a class of speculations, the character of which must be

explained in part by reference to other causes,—impatience of probable or

limited knowledge, so often all that we can really attain to; a desire for

absolute certainty where intimations sufficient to mark out before us the path

of duty, but not to satisfy the demands of the speculative intellect, have alone

been granted to us; perhaps, too, dissatisfaction with the present scene of

things. With the undue predominance of these motives, the more sober

procedure of analogy and probable induction falls into neglect. Yet the latter

is, beyond all question, the course most adapted to our present condition. To

infer the existence of an intelligent cause from the teeming evidences of

surrounding design, to rise to the conception of a moral Governor of the

world, from the study of the constitution and the moral provisions of our own

nature;— these, though but the feeble steps of an understanding limited in its

faculties and its materials of knowledge, are of more avail than the ambitious

attempt to arrive at a certainty unattainable on the ground of natural religion.

And as these were the most ancient, so are they still the most solid

foundations, Revelation being set apart, of the belief that the course of this

world is not abandoned to chance and inexorable fate.                                  CHAPTER XIV.

EXAMPLE OF THE ANALYSIS OF A SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS BY

THE METHOD OF REDUCTION TO A SINGLE EQUIVALENT

EQUATION V = 0, WHEREIN V SATISFIES THE CONDITION V (1 - V)

= 0.

1 • ~I ET us take the remarkable system of premises employed -*-' in the

previous Chapter, to prove that "Matter is not a necessary being;" and

suppressing the 6th premiss, viz., Motion exists,—examine some of the

consequences which flow from the remaining premises. This is in reality to

accept as true Dr. Clarke's hypothetical principles; but to suppose ourselves

ignonorant of the fact of the existence of motion. Instances may occur in

which such a selection of a portion of the premises of an argument may lead

to interesting consequences, though it is with other views that the present

example has been resumed. The premises actually employed will be;—

1. If matter is a necessary being, either the property of gravitation is

necessarily present, or it is necessarily absent.

2. If gravitation is necessarily absent, and the world is not subject to any

presiding intelligence, motion does not exist.

3. If gravitation is necessarily present, a vacuum is necessary.

4. If a vacuum is necessary, matter is not a necessary being.

5. If matter is a necessary being, the world is not subject to a presiding

intelligence.

If, as before, we represent the elementary propositions by the following

notation, viz.:

x = Matter is a necessary being.

y = Gravitation is necessarily present.

w = Motion exists.

t = Gravitation is necessarily absent.

z = The world is merely material, and not subject to a

presiding intelligence. v = A vacuum is necessary.We shall on expression of the premises and elimination of the indefinite

class symbols (y), obtain the following system of equations:

                                    xyt + xyt = 0,

tzw = 0,

yv = 0,

vx = 0,

xz = 0;

in which for brevity y stands for 1 - y, t for 1 -t, and so on; whence, also, 1 - t

= t, 1 - y = y, &c.

As the first members of these equations involve only positive terms, we

can form a single equation by adding them together (VIII. Prop. 2), viz.:

xyt + xyt + yv + vx + xz + tzw - 0,

and it remains to reduce the first member so as to cause it to satisfy the

condition V (l - V) = 0.

For this purpose we will first obtain its development with reference to the

symbols x and y. The result



    (t + v + v + z + tzw) xy+(t + v + z + tzw) xy 

        + (v + tzw) xy + tzwxy - 0. 


And our object will be accomplished by reducing the four coefficients of the

development to equivalent forms, themselves satisfying the condition

required.

Now the first coefficient is, since v + p = 1,

1 + t + z + tzw,

which reduces to unity (IX. Prop. 1). The second coefficient is

t + v + z + tzw;

and its reduced form (X. 3) is

t + tv + tvz + tvzw.The third coefficient, v + tzw, reduces by the same method to v + tzicv;

and the last coefficient tzw needs no reduction. Hence the development

becomes

xy + (7+ tv + tvz + tvzw) xy + (w + feww) xy + ^ztciy = 0; (1)

and this is the form of reduction sought.

2. Now according to the principle asserted in Prop. HI., Chap. X., the

whole relation connecting any particular set of the symbols in the above

equation may be deduced by developing that equation with reference to the

particular symbols in question, and retaining in the result only those

constituents whose coefficients are unity. Thus, if x and y are the symbols

chosen, we are immediately conducted to the equation

xy = 0, whence we have

                                      V = Q 0 - *),

with the interpretation, If gravitation is necessarily present, matter is not a

necessary being.

Let us next seek the relation between x and w. Developing (1) with respect

to those symbols, we get

(jf + ty + tvy + tvzy + tvzy) xw + (y +ty + tvy + tvzy) xib

                                                  + (vy + tzvy + tzy) xw + vyxw = 0.

The coefficient of xw, and it alone, reduces to unity. For tvzy + tvzy = tvy,

and tvy + Ivy = ty, and ty + ty = y, and lastly, y + y = 1. This is always the

mode in which such reductions take place. Hence we get

                                        xw = 0,

                                    .-. w = - (1 - x),

of which the interpretation is, Jf motion exists, matter is not a necessary

being.

If, in like manner, we develop (1) with respect to x and z, we get the

equation

                                        xz = 0,

                                            0                                          Xz
                                        .''~0 ,

with the interpretation, If matter is a necessary being, the world is merely

material, and without a presiding intelligence.

This, indeed, is only the fifth premiss reproduced, but it shows that there is

no other relation connecting the two elements which it involves.

If we seek the whole relation connecting the elements x, w, and y, we find,

on developing (1) with reference to those symbols, and proceeding as before,

xy + xwy = 0.

Suppose it required to determine hence the consequences of the hypothesis,

"Motion does not exist," relatively to the questions of the necessity of matter,

and the necessary presence of gravitation. We find

-xy









 
a; 1 . 0_


      .-.l-w=—= = - xy + xy + -x; 

        xy 0" " 0 


or, 1 - w = xy + - x, with xy = 0.

The direct interpretation of the first equation is, If motion does not exist,

either matter is a necessary being, and gravitation is not necessarily present,

or matter is not a necessary being.

The reverse interpretation is, If matter is a necessary being, and

gravitation not necessary, motion does not exist.

In exactly the same mode, if we sought the full relation between x, z, and

w, we should find

xzw + xz = 0.From this we may deduce

                                          _ 0_

z = xw + - x, with xw = 0.

  Therefore, If the world is merely material, and not subject to any presiding

intelligence, either matter is a necessary being, and motion does not exist, or

matter is not a necessary being.

Also, reversely, If matter is a necessary being, and there is no such thing

as motion, the world is merely material.

3. We might, of course, extend the same method to the determination of

the consequences of any complex hypothesis u, such as, "The world is merely

material, and without any presiding intelligence (z), but motion exists" (w),

with reference to any other elements of doubt or speculation involved in the

original premises, such as, "Matter is a necessary being" (x), "Gravitation is a

necessary quality of matter," (y). We should, for this purpose, connect with

the general equation (1) a new

equation,

                                        u = wz,

reduce the system thus formed to a single equation, V= 0, in which V satisfies

the condition V(\ - V) = 0, and proceed as above to determine the relation

between u, x, and y, and finally u as a developed function of x and y. But it is

very much better to adopt the methods of Chapters viir. and iX. I shall here

simply indicate a few results, with the leading steps of their deduction, and

leave their verification to the reader's choice.

In the problem last mentioned we find, as the relation connecting x, y, w,

and z,

                                xw + xwy + xvbyz = 0.

And if we write u = xy, and then eliminate the symbols x and y by the general

problem, Chap. iX., we find

                                    xu + xyu = 0,

whence 1 . _ 0 _

                                  u = -xy+ 0xy+ -x;wherefore 0 _ .,, _

                                wz = -x with xy = 0.

Hence, If the world is merely material, and without a presiding intelligence,

and at the same time motion exists, matter is not a necessary being.

Now it has before been shown that if motion exists, matter is not a

necessary being, so that the above conclusion tells us even less than we had

before ascertained to be (inferentially) true. Nevertheless, that conclusion is

the proper and complete answer to the question which was proposed, which

was, to determine simply the consequences of a certain complex hypothesis.

4. It would thus be easy, even from the limited system of premises before

us, to deduce a great variety of additional inferences, involving, in the

conditions which are given, any proposed combinations of the elementary

propositions. If the condition is one which is inconsistent with the premises,

the fact will be indicated by the form of the solution. The value which the

method will assign to the combination of symbols expressive of the proposed

condition will be 0. If, on the other hand, the fulfilment of the condition in

question imposes no restriction upon the propositions among which relation

is sought, so that every combination of those propositions is equally possible,

—the fact will also be indicated by the form of the solution. Examples of

each of these cases are subjoined.

If in the ordinary way we seek the consequences which would flow from

the condition that matter is a necessary being, and at the same time that

motion exists, as affecting the Propositions, The world is merely material,

and without a presiding intelligence, and, Gravitation is necessarily present,

we shall obtain the equation

                                        i xw = 0,

which indicates that the condition proposed is inconsistent with the premises,

and therefore cannot be fulfilled.

If we seek the consequences which would flow from the condition that

Matter is not a necessary being, and at the same time that Motion does exist,

with reference to the same elements as above, viz., the absence of a presiding

intelligence, and the necessity of gravitation,—we obtain the following result,

(I -*) w - ^yz + -y (1 -*) + - (1 -y)z + - (1 -y) (1 - z),which might literally be interpreted as follows:

If matter is not a necessary being, and motion exists, then either the world

is merely material and without a presiding intelligence, and gravitation is

necessary, or one of these two results follows without the other, or they both

fail of being true. Wherefore of the four possible combinations, of which

sonic one is true of necessity, and of which of necessity one only can be true,

it is affirmed that any one may be true. Such a result is a truism— a mere

necessary truth. Still it contains the only answer which can be given to the

question proposed.

I do not deem it necessary to vindicate against the charge of laborious

trifling these applications. It may be requisite to enter with some fulness into

details useless in themselves, in order to establish confidence in general

principles and methods. When this end shall have been accomplished in the

subject of the present inquiry, let all that has contributed to its attainment, but

has afterwards been found superfluous, be forgotten.  CHAPTER XV.

THE ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC AND ITS MODERN EXTENSIONS,

EXAMINED BY THE METHOD OF THIS TREATISE.

r
1.  l"VHE logical system of Aristotle, modified in its details, -*- but

unchanged in its essential features, occupies [so important a place in

academical education, that some account of its nature, and some brief

discussion of the leading problems which it presents, seem to be called for in

the present work. It is, I trust, in no narrow or harshly critical spirit that I

approach this task. My object, indeed, is not to institute any direct

comparison between the time-honoured system of the schools and that of the

present treatise; but, setting truth above all other considerations, to endeavour

to exhibit the real nature of the ancient doctrine, and to remove one or two

prevailing misapprehensions respecting its extent and sufficiency.

That which may be regarded as essential in the spirit and procedure of the

Aristotelian, and of all cognate systems of Logic, is the attempted

classification of the allowable forms of inference, and the distinct reference

of those forms, collectively or individually, to some general principle of an

axiomatic nature, such as the "dictum of Aristotle:" Whatsoever is affirmed

or denied of the genus may in the same sense be affirmed or denied of any

species included under that genus. Concerning such general principles it may,

I think, be observed, that they either state directly, but in an abstract form, the

argument which they are supposed to elucidate, and, so stating that argument,

affirm its validity; or involve in their expression technical terms which, after

definition,- conduct us again to the same point, viz., the abstract statement of

the supposed allowable forms of inference. The idea of classification is thus a

pervading element in those systems. Furthermore, they exhibit Logic as

resolvable into two great branches, the one of which is occupied with the

treatment of categorical, the other with that of hypothetical or conditional

propositions. The distinction is nearly identical with that of primary and

secondary propositions in the present work. The discussion of the theory of

categorical propositions is, in all the ordinary treatises of Logic, much more

full and elaborate than that of hypothetical propositions, and is occupied

partly with ancient scholastic distinctions, partly with the canons of deductive

inference. To the latter application only is it necessary to direct attention here.

2. Categorical propositions are classed under the four following heads,viz.:

                                                                                    TYPE.

1st. Universal affirmative Propositions: All Y's are X's. 2nd. Universal

negative „ No Y's are X's.

3rd. Particular affirmative „ Some Y's are X's.

4th. Particular negative „ Some Y's are not X's.

To these forms, four others have recently been added, so as to constitute in

the whole eight forms (see the next article) susceptible, however, of reduction

to six, and subject to relations which have been discussed with great fulness

and ability by Professor De Morgan, in his Formal Logic. A scheme

somewhat different from the above has been given to the world by Sir W.

Hamilton, and is made the basis of a method of syllogistic inference, which is

spoken of with very high respect by authorities on the subject of Logic.*

The processes of Formal Logic, in relation to the above system of

propositions, are described as of two kinds, viz., " Conversion" and "

Syllogism." By Conversion is meant the expression of any proposition of the

above kind in an equivalent form, but with a reversed order of terms. By

Syllogism is meant the deduction from two such propositions having a

common term, whether subject or predicate, of some third proposition

inferentially involved in the two, and forming the " conclusion." It is

maintained by most writers on Logic, that these processes, and according to

some, the single process of Syllogism, furnish the universal types of

reasoning, and that it is the business of the mind, in any train of

demonstration, to conform itself, whether

• Thomson's Outlines of the Laws of Thought, p. 177.

consciously or unconsciously, to the particular models of the processes which

have been classified in the writings of logicians.

3. The course which I design to pursue is to show how these processes of

Syllogism and Conversion may be conducted in the most general manner

upon the principles of the present treatise, and, viewing them thus in relation

to a system of Logic, the foundations of which, it is conceived, have been laid

in the ultimate laws of thought, to seek to determine their true place and

essential character.The expressions of the eight fundamental types of proposition in the

language of symbols are as follows:

1. All Y's are X's, y = vx.

2. No Y's are X's, y = v(l-x).

3. Some Y's are X's, vy = vx.

4. Some Ys are not-X's, vy - e(l - x).

5. All not- Y's are X's, 1 - y = vx. (1)

6. No not- Ys are X's, 1 - y = w (1 - *)•

7. Some not- Ys are X's, v (1 - y) = vx.

8. Some not- Ys are not-X's, v (1 -y) = v (1 - x).

In referring to these forms, it will be convenient to apply, in a sense shortly

to be explained, the epithets of logical quantity, "universal" and "particular,"

and of quality, "affirmative" and "negative," to the terms of propositions, and

not to the propositions themselves. We shall thus consider the term " All Y's,"

as universal-affirmative; the term " Y's," or "Some Y's," as particular-

affirmative; the term "All not- Y's," as universal-negative; the term " Some

not- Ys," as particular-negative. The expression "No Y's," is not properly a

term of a proposition, for the true meaning of the proposition, "No Ys are

X's," is "All Y's are not-X's." The subject of that proposition is, therefore,

universal-affirmative, the predicate particular-negative. That there is a real

distinction between the conceptions of " men" and "not men" is manifest.

This distinction is all that I contemplate when applying as above the

designations of affirmative and negative, without, however, insisting upon

the etymological propriety of the application to the terms of propositions. The

designations positive and privative would have been more appropriate, but

the former term is already employed in a fixed sense in other parts of this

work.

4. From the symbolical forms -above given the laws of conversion

immediately follow. Thus from the equation

                                        y = vx,

representing the proposition, "All Ys are X's," we deduce, on eliminating v,                                    y (1 - x) = 0,

which gives by solution with reference to 1 - «,

                                      i-*.-£(i-y);

the interpretation of which is,

                              All not-X's are not- Y's.

This is an example of what is called "negative conversion." In like manner,

the equation

                                    y = v (1 - *),

representing the proposition, "No Y's are X's," gives

                                              1
                                      * - 0 C" »).

the interpretation of which is, "No J's are Vs." This is an example of what is

termed simple conversion; though it is in reality of the same kind as the

conversion exhibited in the previous example. All the examples of conversion

which have been noticed by logicians are either of the above kind, or of that

which consists in the mere transposition of the terms of a proposition, without

altering their quality, as when we change

vy = vx, representing, Some Y's are X's, into

vx = vy, representing, Some X's are Ys;

or they involve a combination of those processes with some auxiliary process

of limitation, as when from the equation

y = vx, representing, All Ys are X's, we deduce on multiplication by v,

vy = vx, representing, Some Ys are X's, and hence

vx = vy, representing, Some X's are Y's.

In this example, the process of limitation precedes that of transposition.

  From these instances it is seen that conversion is a particular application of

a much more general process in Logic, of which many examples have been

given in this work. That process has for its object the determination of any

element in any proposition, however complex, as a logical function of the

remaining elements. Instead of confining our attention to the subject andpredicate, regarded as simple terms, we can take any element or any

combination of elements entering into either of them; make that element, or

that combination, the " subject" of a new proposition; and determine what its

predicate shall be, in accordance with the data afforded to us. It may be

remarked, that even the simple forms of propositions enumerated above

afford some ground for the application of such a method, beyond what the

received laws of conversion appear to recognise. Thus the equation

y= vx, representing, All Ve are X's,

gives us, in addition to the proposition before deduced, the three following:

1st. y (1 - a;) = 0. There are no Vs that are not-X's.


    0 

    0 






 

+ (1 ~z). Things that are not- ¥’s include all
things that are not-A"*, and an indefinite remainder of things that are X's.

3rd. x = y + - (1-y). Things that are X's include all things

that are Y's, and an indefinite remainder of things that are notY's.

  These conclusions, it is true, merely place the given proposition in other

and equivalent forms,—but such and no more is the office of the received

mode of " negative conversion."

  Furthermore, these processes of conversion are not elementary, but they

are combinations of processes more simple than they, more immediately

dependent upon the ultimate laws and axioms which govern the use of the

symbolical instrument of reasoning. This remark is equally applicable to the

case of Syllogism, which we proceed next to consider.

5. The nature of syllogism is best seen in the particular instance. Suppose

that we have the propositions,


                 All X'S are Y's, 

                 All Ts are Z's.     From these we may deduce the conclusion, 

                   All X'S are Z's. 


This is a syllogistic inference. The terms X and Z are called the extremes, and

Y is called the middle term. The function of the syllogism generally may now

be defined. Given two propositions of the kind whose species are tabulated in

(1), and involving one middle or common term Y, which is connected in one

of the propositions with an extreme X, in the other with an extreme Z;

required the relation connecting the extremes X and Z. The term Y may

appear in its affirmative form, as, All Y's, Some Y's; or in its negative form,

as, All not- Y's, Some notY'S; in either proposition, without regard to the

particular form which it assumes in the other.

  Nothing is easier than in particular instances to resolve the Syllogism by

the method of this treatise. Its resolution is, indeed, a particular application of

the process for the reduction of systems of propositions. Taking the examples

above given, we have,



whence by substitution, which is interpreted into



Or, proceeding rigorously in accordance with the method developed in (VIII.

7), we deduce

                              x (1 - y) - 0, y (1 - z) - 0.

Adding these equations, and eliminating y, we have

                                      x (1 - z) - 0;









@ =y
y=uz;

z =iz,

All X’s are Z's.
whence x = -z, or, All X's are Z's.

And in the same way may any other case be treated.6. Quitting, however, the consideration of special examples, let us examine

the general forms to which all syllogism may be reduced.


          PROPOSITION I. 

    To deduce the general rules of Syllogism. 


By the general rules of Syllogism, I here mean the rules applicable to

premises admitting of every variety both of quantity and of quality in their

subjects and predicates, except the combination of two universal terms in the

same proposition. The admissible forms of propositions are therefore those of

which a tabular view is given in (1).

Let X and Fbe the elements or things entering into the first premiss, Z and

Y those involved in the second. Two cases, fundamentally different in

character, will then present themselves. The terms involving Y will either be

.of like or of unlike quality, those terms being regarded as of like quality

when they both speak of" Y's," or both of" Not- Y's," as of unlike quality

when one of them speaks of" Y's," and the other of " Not- Y's." Any pair of

premises, in which the former condition is satisfied, may be represented by

the equations

                                                                              vx = v'y, (1)

                                                                          wz <= w'y; (2)

for we can employ the symbol y to represent either " All Y's," or "- All not-

Y's," since the interpretation of the symbol is purely conventional. If we

employ y in the sense of " All not- Y's," then 1 - y will represent "All Y's,"

and no other change will be introduced. An equal freedom is permitted with

respect to the symbols x and z, so that the equations (1) and (2) may, by

properly assigning the interpretations of x, y, and z, be made to represent all

varieties in the combination of premises dependent upon the quality of the

respective terms. Again, by assuming proper interpretations to the symbols v,

«/, w, «/, in those equations, all varieties with reference to quantity may also

be represented. Thus, if we take v 1, and represent by v a class indefinite, the

equation (1) will represent a universal proposition according to the ordinary

sense of that term, i. e., a proposition with universal subject and particular

predicate. We may, in fact, give to subject and predicate in either premiss

whatever quantities (using this term in the scholastic sense) we please, exceptthat by hypothesis, they must not both be universal. The system (1), (2),

represents, therefore, with perfect generality, the possible combinations of

premises which have like middle terms.

7. That our analysis may be as general as the equations to which it is

applied, let us, by the method of this work, eliminate y from (1) and (2), and

seek the expressions for x, 1 - x, and vx, in terms of z and of the symbols v, v,

w, w'. The above will include all the possible forms of the subject of the

conclusion. The form v (1 -a;) is excluded, inasmuch as wc cannot from the

interpretation vx = Some X's, given in the premises, interpret v (1 - x) as

Some not-X's. The symbol v, when used in the sense of "some," applies to

that term only with which it is connected in the premises.

The results of the analysis are as follows:

x = [OTW+ -[m/(l-w)(l-v/)+ww'(l-v)(l-v')+^l-v)(l-w)}'\z jj{W(l-„,<)+l-r)(l-z), (I.)

1 -x=[e(l-t>') [ww' + (l -to)(l -w')) +c(l -to)to' + jj {ot/(l-w)(l-w') + uW(l-

t>)(l -»') + 0 -»)(l-«0)>

+ [t>(l-w)«/+?{w/(l-«0 + l-t>}](l-*), (H.)

                ,r
  vx={w'ww'+^w(l-w)(l-u/)}z+^(l-w)(l-z). (III.)

Each of these expressions involves in its second member two terms, of one

of which z is a factor, of the other I - z. But syllogistic inference does not, as a

matter of form, admit of contrary classes in its conclusion, as of Z's, and not-

^'s together. We must, therefore, in order to determine the rules of that

species of inference, ascertain under what conditions the second members of

any of our equations are reducible to a single term.

The simplest form is (III.), and it is reducible to a single term if w = 1. The

equation then becomes

                                                                          vx = vv'wz, (3)

the first member is identical with the extreme in the first premiss; the second

is of the same quantity and quality as the extreme in the second premiss. For

since w' =1, the second member of (2), involving the middle term y, is

universal; therefore, by the hypothesis, the first member is particular, and

therefore, the second member of (3), involving the same symbol to in its

coefficient, is particular also. Hence we deduce the following law.  CONDITION OF INFERENCE.—One middle term, at least, universal.

  ROLE OF INFERENCE.—Equate the extremes.

  From an analysis of the equations (I.) and (II.), it will further appear, that

the above is the only condition of syllogistic inference when the middle terms

are of like quality. Thus the second member of (I.) reduces to a single term, if

to' = 1 and v = 1; and the second member of (II.) reduces to a single term, if

to' = 1, »- 1, io = l. In each of these cases, it is necessary that to'= 1, the solely

sufficient condition before assigned.

  Consider, secondly, the case in which the middle terms are of unlike

quality. The premises may then be represented under the forms

                                                                              vx = v'y, (4)

                                                                        wz= to'(l -y); (5)

and if, as before, we eliminate y, and determine the expressions of re, 1 - x,

and vx, we get

X- [W(l -W) «/ + J {tOK/(l -v) + (I -v) (1 -«) (1 -w)

+ t/(l-to)(l-«0}]2 + [V +1 {(1 - v) (1 - »') + i/( 1 - «0)] (1 - z). (IV.)

1 - x= [ww'v + v(1 - v) (1 - to) + - {ww (1 - v)

+ (1 - V) (1 - t/) (1 - «7) + t/(l -to) (1 - W')j] 2

+ 0( i -0 + ^K(i-«0+(!-•)(i-*)}]a-*)- (v.)

»x = {tn/(l-to)to' + — wt/(l - w) (1 - to')} z

+ {tn/to' + jj W(1 - toO) (1 - *). (VI.)

Now the second member of (VI.) reduces to a single term relatively to z, if w

= 1, giving

vx = {tw'to' + - vv (1 - to')} (1 - z);

the second member of which is opposite, both in quantity and quality, to the

corresponding extreme, wz, in the second premiss. For since to = 1, wz is

universal. But the factor vni indicates that the term to which it is attached is

particular, since by hypothesis v and v are not both equal to 1. Hence we

deduce the following law of inference in the case of like middle terms:FIRST CONDITION OF INFERENCE.—At least one universal extreme.

  RULE OF INFERENCE.—Change the quantity and quality of that extreme, and equate

the result to the other extreme.

  Moreover, the second member of (V.) reduces to a single term if if *= 1, id

= 1; it then gives

                            1 - x = {»to + - (1 - v) to) z.

Now since v =l, «/= 1, the middle terms of the premises are both universal,

therefore the extremes vx, wz, are particular. But in the conclusion the

extreme involving x is opposite, both in quantity and quality, to the extreme

vx in the first premiss, while the extreme involving z agrees both in quantity

and quality with the corresponding extreme wz in the second premiss. Hence

the following general law:

  SECOND CONDITION OF INFERENCE.— Two universal middle terms.

- ROLE «F INFERENCE.—Change the quantity and quality of either extreme, and

equate the result to the other extreme unchanged.

  There are in the case of unlike middle terms no other conditions or rules of

syllogistic inference than the above. Thus the equation (IV.), though

reducible to the form of a syllogistic conclusion, when w = 1 and v = 1, does

not thereby establish a new condition of inference; since, by what has

preceded, the single condition v = 1, or w = 1, would suffice.

8. The following examples will sufficiently illustrate the general rules of

syllogism above given:


    1. All Fsare Xs. 

   All Z's are Fs. 


    This belongs to Case 1. All Y's is the universal middle term. 

    The extremes equated give as the conclusion 


All Z's are Xs; the universal term, All Z's, becoming the subject; the

particular term (some) Xs, the predicate.


    2. All X's are Fs. 

  No Z's are Fs. The proper expression of these premises is

All X's are Fs.

All Z's are not- Fs. They belong to Case 2, and satisfy the first condition of

inference. The middle term, Fs, in the first premiss, is particular-affirmative;

that in the second premiss, not- Fs, particular-negative. If we take All Z's as

the universal extreme, and change its quantity and quality according to the

rule, we obtain the term Some not-Zs, and this equated with the other

extreme, All X's, gives,

All X's are not-Zs, i. e., No X's are Z's.

If we commence with the other universal extreme, and proceed similarly, we

obtain the equivalent result,

No Z's are X's.


    3. All Fs are JTe. 

  Allnot-Y'sareZ's. 


Here alao the middle terms are unlike in quality. The premises therefore

belong to Case 2, and there being two universal middle terms, the second

condition of inference is satisfied. If by the rule we change the quantity and

quality of the first extreme, (some) X"B, we obtain All not-X's, which, equated

with the other extreme, gives

All nofc-Xs are 2Ts.

The reverse order of procedure would give the equivalent result,

All not-Z's are X's.

The conclusions of the two last examples would not be recognised as valid

in the scholastic system of Logic, which virtually requires that the subject of

a proposition should be affirmative. They are, however, perfectly legitimate

in themselves, and the rules by which they are determined form undoubtedly

the most general canons of syllogistic inference. The process of investigation

by which they are deduced will probably appear to be of needless

complexity; and it is certain that they might have been obtained with greater

facility, and without the aid of any symbolical instrument whatever. It was,

however, my object to conduct the investigation in the most general manner,and by an analysis thoroughly exhaustive. With this end in view, the brevity

or prolixity of the method employed is- a matter of indifference. Indeed the

analysis is not properly that of the syllogism, but of a much more general

combination of propositions; for we are permitted to assign to the symbols v,
'
v, w, w', any class-interpretations that we please. To illustrate this remark, I

will apply the solution (I.) to the following imaginary case:

  Suppose that a number of pieces of cloth striped with different colours

were submitted to inspection, and that the two following observations were

made upon them:

1st. That every piece striped with white and green was also striped with

black and yellow, and vice versa.

2nd. That every piece striped with red and orange was also striped with

blue and yellow, and vice versa. .

  Suppose it then required to determine how the pieces marked with green

stood affected with reference to the colours white, black, red, orange, and

blue.

Here if we assume v = white, x = green, v' = black, y = yellow, w = red, z =

orange, w' = blue, the expression of our premises will be


    vx = v'y, 

    wz= toy, 


agreeing with the system (1) (2). The equation (I.) then leads to the following

conclusion:

  Pieces striped with green are either striped with orange, white, black, red,

and blue, together, all pieces possessing which character are included in those

striped with green; or they are striped with orange, white, and black, but not

with red or blue; or they are striped with orange, red, and blue, but not with

white or black; or they are striped with orange, but not with white or red; or

they are striped with white and black, but not with blue or orange; or they are

striped neither with white nor orange.

  Considering the nature of this conclusion, neither the symbolical

expression (I.) by which it is conveyed, nor the analysis by which that

expression is deduced, can be considered as needlessly compleX.9. The form in which the doctrine of syllogism has been presented in this

chapter affords ground for an important observation. We have seen that in

each of its two great divisions the entire discussion is reducible, so far, at

least, as concerns the determination of rules and methods, to the analysis of a

pair of equations, viz., of the system (1), (2), when the premises have like

middle terms, and of the system (4), (5), when the middle terms are unlike.

Moreover, that analysis has been actually conducted by a method founded

upon certain general laws deduced immediately from the constitution of

language, Chap. II., confirmed by the study of the operations of the human

mind, Chap. in., and proved to be applicable to the analysis of all systems of

equations whatever, by which propositions, or combinations of propositions,

can be represented, Chap. vm. Here, then, we have the means of definitely

resolving the question, whether syllogism is indeed the fundamental type of

reasoning,—whether the study of its laws is co-extensive with the study of

deductive logic. For if it be so, some indication of the fact must be given in

the systems of equations upon the analysis of which we have been engaged. It

cannot be conceived that syllogism should be the one essential process of

reasoning, and yet the manifestation of that process present nothing indicative

of this high quality of pre-eminence. No sign, however, appears that the

discussion of all systems of equations expressing propositions is involved in

that of the particular system examined in this chapter. And yet writers on

Logic have been all but unanimous in their assertion, not merely of the

supremacy, but of the universal sufficiency of syllogistic inference in

deductive reasoning. The language of Archbishop Whately, always clear and

definite, and on the subject of Logic entitled to peculiar attention, is very

express on this point. "For Logic," he says, "which is, as it were, the

Grammar of Reasoning, does not bring forward the regular Syllogism as a

distinct mode of argumentation, designed to be substituted for any other

mode; but as the form to which all correct reasoning may be ultimately

reduced."* And Mr. Mill, in a chapter of his System of Logic, entitled, "Of

Ratiocination or Syllogism," having enumerated the ordinary forms of

syllogism, observes, "All valid ratiocination, all reasoning by which from

general propositions previously admitted, other propositions, equally or less

general, are inferred, may be exhibited in some of the above forms." And

again: "We are therefore at liberty, in conformity with the general opinion of

logicians, to consider the two elementary forms of the first figure as the

universal types of all correct ratiocination." In accordance with these views ithas been contended that the science of Logic enjoys an immunity from those

conditions of imperfection and of progress to which all other sciences are

subject ;f and its origin from the travail of one mighty mind of old has, by a

somewhat daring metaphor, been compared to the mythological birth of

Pallas.

As Syllogism is a species of elimination, the question before us manifestly

resolves itself into the two following ones:—1st. Whether all elimination is

reducible to Syllogism; 2ndly. Whe


    • Elements or Logic, p. 13, ninth edition, 

    t Introduction to Kant's "Logik." 


ther deductive reasoning can with propriety be regarded as consisting only of

elimination. I believe, upon careful examination, the true answer to the

former question to be, that it is always theoretically possible so to resolve and

combine propositions that elimination may subsequently be effected by the

syllogistic canons, but that the process of reduction would in many instances

be constrained and unnatural, and would involve operations which are not

syllogistic. To the second question I reply, that reasoning cannot, except by

an arbitrary restriction of its meaning, be confined to the process of

elimination. No definition can suffice which makes it less than the aggregate

of the methods which are founded upon the laws of thought, as exercised

upon propositions; and among those methods, the process of elimination,

eminently important as it is, occupies only a place.

  Much of the error, as I cannot but regard it, which prevails respecting the

nature of the Syllogism and the extent of its office, seems to be founded in a

disposition to regard all those truths in Logic as primary which possess the

character of simplicity and intuitive certainty, without inquiring into the

relation which they sustain to other truths in the Science, or to general

methods in the Art, of Reasoning. Aristotle's dictum de omni et nullo is a self-

evident principle, but it is not found among those ultimate laws of the

reasoning faculty to which all other laws, however plain and self-evident,

admit of being traced, and from which they may in strictest order of scientific

evolution be deduced. For though of every science the fundamental truths are

usually the most simple of apprehension, yet is not that simplicity the

criterion by which their title to be regarded as fundamental must be judged.This must be sought for in the nature and extent of the structure which they

are capable of supporting. Taking this view, Leibnitz appears to me to have

judged correctly when he assigned to the "principle of contradiction" a

fundamental place in Logic ;* for we have seen the consequences of that law

of thought of which it is the axiomatic expression (III. 15). But enough has

been said upon the nature of deductive inference and upon its constitutive

elements. The subject of induction may probably receive some attention in

another part of this work.

      * Nouveaux Essais sur 1'entcndemcnt humain. LiT. iv. cap. 2.

    Theodic£e Pt. I. sec. 44.

10. It has been remarked in this chapter that the ordinary treatment of

hypothetical, is much more defective than that of categorical, propositions.

What is commonly termed the hypothetical syllogism appears, indeed, to be

no syllogism at all. Let the argument—


                    If 4 is .B, Cis A 

                 But A is B, 

                    Therefore C is D, 

    be put in the form— 


    If the proposition A' is true, Y is true, 

              But X is true, 

                 Therefore Y is true; 


wherein by A is meant the proposition A is B, and by Y, the proposition C is

D. It is then seen that the premises contain only two terms or elements, while

a syllogism essentially involves three. The following would be a genuine

hypothetical syllogism:

If X is true, Y is true; If Y is true, Z is true; .•. If X is true, Z is true.

  After the discussion of secondary propositions in a former part of this

work, it is evident that the forms of hypothetical syllogism must present, in

every respect, an exact counterpart to those of categorical syllogism.

Particular Propositions, such as, "Sometimes if A is true, Y is true," may be

introduced, and the conditions and rules of inference deduced in this chapter

for categorical syllogisms may, without abatement, be interpreted to meet the

corresponding cases in hypotheticals.11. To what final conclusions are we then led respecting the nature and

extent of the scholastic logic? I think to the following: that it is not a science,

but a collection of scientific truths, too incomplete to form a system of

themselves, and not sufficiently fundamental to serve as the foundation upon

which a perfect system may rest. It does not, however, follow, that because

the logic of the schools has been invested with attributes to which it

                                            B

has no just claim, it is therefore undeserving of regard. A system which has

been associated with the very growth of language, which has left its stamp

upon the greatest questions and the most famous demonstrations of

philosophy, cannot be altogether unworthy of attention. Memory, too, and

usage, it must be admitted, have much to do with the intellectual processes;

and there are certain of the canons of the ancient logic which have become

almost inwoven in the very texture of thought in cultured minds. But whether

the mnemonic forms, in which the particular rules of conversion and

syllogism have been exhibited, possess any real utility,—whether the very

skill which they are supposed to impart might not, with greater advantage to

the mental powers, be acquired by the unassisted efforts of a mind left to its

own resources,—are questions which it might still be not unprofitable to

examine. As concerns the particular results deduced in this chapter, it is to be

observed, that they are solely designed to aid the inquiry concerning the

nature of the ordinary or scholastic logic, and its relation to a more perfect

theory of deductive reasoning.                                  CHAPTER XVI.

ON THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES.

1. T)EFORE the expiration of another year just two centuries -*-* will have

rolled away since Pascal solved the first known question in the theory of

Probabilities, and laid, in its solution, the foundations of a science possessing

no common share of the attraction which belongs to the more abstract of

mathematical speculations. The problem which the Chevalier de Mere, a

reputed gamester, proposed to the recluse of Port Royal (not yet withdrawn

from the interests of science* by the more distracting contemplation of the

"greatness and the misery of man"), was the first of a long series of problems,

destined to call into existence new methods in mathematical analysis, and to

render valuable service in the practical concerns of life. Nor does the interest

of the subject centre merely in its mathematical connexion, or its associations

of utility. The attention is repaid which is devoted to the theory of

Probabilities as an independent object of speculation,—to the fundamental

modes in which it has been conceived,—to the great secondary principles

which, as in the contemporaneous science of Mechanics, have gradually been

annexed to it,—and, lastly, to the estimate of the measure of perfection which

has been actually attained. I speak here of that perfection which consists in

unity of conception and harmony of processes. Some of these points it is

designed very briefly to consider in the present chapter.

2. A distinguished writerf has thus stated the fundamental definitions of the

science:

      • See in particular a letter addressed by Pascal to Format, who had

    solicited his attention to a mathematical problem (Port Royal, par M. de

    Sainte Beuve); also various passages in the collection of Fragments

    published by M. Prosper Faugere.

    f Poisson, Recherches sur la Probability des Jugemens.

  "The probability of an event is the reason we have to believe that it has

taken place, or that it will take place."

  "The measure of the probability of an event is the ratio of the number of

cases favourable to that event, to the total number of cases favourable or

contrary, and all equally possible" (equally likely to happen).  From these definitions it follows that the word probability, in its

mathematical acceptation, has reference to the state of our knowledge of the

circumstances under which an event may happen or fail. With the degree of

information which we possess concerning the circumstances of an event, the

reason we have to think that it will occur, or, to use a single term, our

expectation of it, will vary. Probability is expectation founded upon partial

knowledge. A perfect acquaintance with all the circumstances affecting the

occurrence of an event would change expectation into certainty, and leave

neither room nor demand for a theory of probabilities.

3. Though our expectation of an event grows stronger with the increase of

the ratio of the number of the known cases favourable to its occurrence to the

whole number of equally possible cases, favourable or unfavourable, it would

be unphilosophical to affirm that the strength of that expectation, viewed as

an emotion of the mind, is capable of being referred to any numerical

standard. The man of sanguine temperament builds high hopes where the

timid despair, and the irresolute are lost in doubt. As subjects of scientific

inquiry, there is some analogy between opinion and sensation. The

thermometer and the carefully prepared photographic plate indicate, not the

intensity of the sensations of heat and light, but certain physical

circumstances which accompany the production of those sensations. So also

the theory of probabilities contemplates the numericalmeasure of the

circumstances upon which expectation is founded; and this object embraces

the whole range of its legitimate applications. The rules which we employ in

life-assurance, and in the other statistical applications of the theory of

probabilities, are altogether independent of the mental phenomena of

expectation. They are founded upon the assumption that the future will bear a

resemblance to the past; that under the same circumstances the same event

will tend to recur with a definite numerical frequency; not upon any attempt

to submit to calculation the strength of human hopes and fears.

Now experience actually testifies that events of a given species do, under

given circumstances, tend to recur with definite frequency, whether their true

causes be known to us or unknown. Of course this tendency is, in general,

only manifested when the area of observation is sufficiently large. The

judicial records of a great nation, its registries of births and deaths, in relation

to age and sex, &c., present a remarkable uniformity from year to year. In a

given language, or family of languages, the same sounds, and successions ofsounds, and, if it be a written language, the same characters and successions

of characters recur with determinate frequency. The key to the rude Ogham

inscriptions, found in various parts of Ireland, and in which no distinction of

words could at first be traced, was, by a strict application of this principle,

recovered.* The same method, it is understood, has been appliedf to the

deciphering of the cuneiform records recently disentombed from the ruins of

Nineveh by the enterprise of Mr. Layard.

4. Let us endeavour from the above statements and definitions to form a

conception of the legitimate object of the theory of Probabilities.

  Probability, it has been said, consists in the expectation founded upon a

particular kind of knowledge, viz., the knowledge of the relative frequency of

occurrence of events. Hence the probabilities of events, or of combinations of

events, whether deduced from a knowledge of the particular constitution of

things under which they happen, or derived from the long-continued

observation of a past series of their occurrences and failures, constitute, in all

cases, our data. The probability of some connected event, or combination of

events, constitutes the corresponding quasitum, or object sought. Now in the

most general, yet strict meaning of the term "event," every combination of

events constitutes also an event. The simultaneous occurrence of two or more

events, or the occurrence of an event under given conditions, or in any

conceivable connexion with other events, is still an event. Using the term in

this liberty of application, the object of the theory of probabilities might be

thus defined. Given the probabilities of any events, of whatever kind, to find

the probability of some other event connected with them.

      • The discovery is due to the Rev. Charles Graves, Professor of

    Mathematics

    in the University of Dublin Vide Proceedings of the Royal Irish

    Academy,

    Feb. 14, 1848. Professor Graves informs me that he has verified the

    principle by constructing sequence tables for all the European

      languages.

    t By the learned Orientalist, Dr. Edward Uincks.

5. Events may be distinguished as simple or compound, the latter term

being applied to such events as consist in a combination pf simple events (I.13). In this manner we might define it as the practical end of the theory under

consideration to determine the probability of some event, simple or

compound, from the given probabilities of other events, simple or compound,

with which, by the terms of its definition, it stands connected.

  Thus if it is known from the constitution of a die that there

is a probability, measured by the fraction ^, that the result of

any particular throw will be an ace, and if it is required to determine the

probability that there shall occur one ace, and only one, in two successive

throws, we may state the problem in the order of its data and its quasitum, as

follows:

FIRST DATUM.—Probability of the event that the first throw will give an ace = -

%.

  SECOND DATUM.—Probability of the event that the second throw will give an ace

= -.

    QUJESITUM.—Probability of the event that either the first throw will give an ace,

and the second not an ace; or the first will not give an ace, and the second

will give one.

Here the two data are the probabilities of simple events defined as the first

throw giving an ace, and the second throw giving an ace. The quesitum is the

probability of a compound event,—a certain disjunctive combination of the

simple events involved or implied in the data. Probably it will generally

happen, when the numerical conditions of a problem are capable of being

deduced, as above, from the constitution of things under which they exist,

that the data will be the probabilities of simple events, and the quesitum the

probability of a compound event dependent upon the said simple events. Such

is the case with a class of problems which has occupied perhaps an undue

share of the attention of those who have studied the theory of probabilities,

viz., games of chance and skill, in the former of which some physical

circumstance, as the constitution of a die, determines the probability of each

possible step of the game, its issue being some definite combination of those

steps; while in the latter, the relative dexterity of the players, supposed to be

known a priori, equally determines the same element. But where, as in

statistical problems, the elements of our knowledge are drawn, not from the

study of the constitution of things, but from the registered observations ofNature or of human society, there is no reason why the data which such

observations afford should be the probabilities of simple events. On the

contrary, the occurrence of events or conditions in marked combinations

(indicative of some secret connexion of a causal character') suggests to us the

propriety of making such concurrences, profitable for future instruction by a

numerical record of their frequency. Now the data which observations of this

kind afford are the probabilities of compound events. The solution, by some

general method, of problems in which such data are involved, is thus not only

essential to the perfect development of the theory of probabilities, but also a

perhaps necessary condition of its application to a large and practically

important class of inquiries.

6. Before we proceed to estimate to what extent known methods may be

applied to the solution of problems such as the above, it will be advantageous

to notice, that there is another form under which all questions in the theory of

probabilities may be viewed; and this form consists in substituting for events

the propositions which assert that those events have occurred, or will occur;

and viewing the element of numerical probability as having reference to the

truth of those propositions, not to the occurrence of the events concerning

which they make assertion. Thus, instead of considering the numerical

fraction p as expressing the probability of the occurrence of an event E, let it

be viewed as representing the probability of the truth of the proposition X,

which asserts that the event E will occur. Similarly, instead of any

probability, q, being considered as referring to some compound event, such

as the concurrence of the events E and F, let it represent the probability of the

truth of the proposition which asserts that E and F will jointly occur; and in

like manner, let the transformation be made from disjunctive and hypothetical

combinations of events to disjunctive and conditional propositions. Though

the new application thus assigned to probability is a necessary concomitant of

the old one, its adoption will be attended with a practical advantage drawn

from the circumstance that we have already discussed the theory of

propositions, have defined their principal varieties, and established methods

for determining, in every case, the amount and character of their mutual

dependence. Upon this, or upon some equivalent basis, any general theory of

probabilities must rest. I do not say that other considerations may not in

certain cases of applied theory be requisite. The data may prove insufficient

for definite solution, and this defect it may be thought necessary to supply by

hypothesis. Or, where the statement of large numbers is involved, difficultiesmay arise after the solution, from this source, for which special methods of

treatment are required. But in every instance, some form of the general

problem as above stated (Art. 4) is involved, and in the discussion of that

problem the proper and peculiar work of the theory consists. I desire it to be

observed, that to this object the investigations of the following chapters are

mainly devoted. It is not intended to enter, except incidentally, upon

questions involving supplementary hypotheses, because it is of primary

importance, even with reference to such questions (I. 17), that a general

method, founded upon a solid and sufficient basis of theory, be first

established.

7. The following is a summary, chiefly taken from Laplace, of the

principles which have been applied to the solution of questions of probability.

They are consequences of its fundamental definitions already stated, and may

be regarded as indicating the degree in which it has been found possible to

render those definitions available.

  PRINCIPLE 1st. If p be the probability of the occurrence of any event, 1 -p will

be the probability of its non-occurrence.

2nd. The probability of the concurrence of two independent events is the

product of the probabilities of those events.

3rd. The probability of the concurrence of two dependent events is equal to

the product of the probability of one of them by the probability that if that

event occur, the other will happen also.

4th. The probability that if an event, E, take place, an event, F, will also

take place, is equal to the probability of the concurrence of the events E and

F, divided by the probability of the occurrence of E.

5th. The probability of the occurrence of one or the other of two events

which cannot concur is equal to the sum of their separate probabilities.

6th. If an observed event can only result from some one of n different

causes which are d priori equally probable, the probability of any one of the

causes is a fraction whose numerator is the probability of the event, on the

hypothesis of the existence of that cause, and whose denominator is the sum

of the similar probabilities relative to all the causes.

7th. The probability of a future event is the sum of the products formed bymultiplying the probability of each cause by the probability that if that cause

exist, the said future event will take place.

8. Respecting the extent and the relative sufficiency of these principles, the

following observations may be made.

1st. It is always possible, by the due combination of these principles, to

express the probability of a compound event, dependent in any manner upon

independent simple events whose distinct probabilities are given. A very

large proportion of the problems which have been actually solved are of this

kind, and the difficulty attending their solution has not arisen from the

insufficiency of the indications furnished by the theory of probabilities, but

from the need of an analysis which should render those indications available

when functions of large numbers, or series consisting of many and

complicated terms, are thereby introduced. It may, therefore, be fully

conceded, that all problems having for their data the probabilities of

independent simple events fall within the scope of received methods.

  2ndly. Certain of the principles above enumerated, and especially the sixth

and seventh, do not presuppose that all the data are the probabilities of simple

events. In their peculiar application to questions of causation, they do,

however, assume, that the causes of which they take account are mutually

exclusive, so that no combination of them in the production of an effect is

possible. If, as before explained, we transfer the numerical probabilities from

the events with which they are connected to the propositions by which those

events are expressed, the most general problem to which the aforesaid

principles are applicable may be stated in the following order of data and

qttasita.

  DATA.


    1st. The probabilities of the n conditional propositions: 

     If the cause A\ exist, the event E will follow; 


55 -"I 55 -" 55

55 -"» 55 « 55

2nd. The condition that the antecedents of those propositions are mutually

conflicting.  REQUIREMENTS.

The probability of the truth of the proposition which declares the

occurrence of the event E; also, when that proposition is known to be true,

the probabilities of truth of the several propositions which affirm the

respective occurrences of the causes

Here it is seen, that the data are the probabilities of a series of compound

events, expressed by conditional propositions. But the system is obviously a

very limited and particular one. For the antecedents of the propositions are

subject to the condition of being mutually exclusive, and there is but one

consequent, the event E, in the whole system. It does not follow, from our

ability to discuss such a system as the above, that we are able to resolve

problems whose data are the probabilities of any system of conditional

propositions; far less that we can resolve problems whose data are the

probabilities of any system of propositions whatever. And, viewing the

subject in its material rather than its formal aspect, it is evident, that the

hypothesis of exclusive causation is one which is not often realized in the

actual world, the phenomena of which seem to be, usually, the products of

complex causes, the amount and character of whose co-operation is

unknown. Such is, without doubt, the case in nearly all departments of natural

or social inquiry in which the doctrine of probabilities holds out any new

promise of useful applications.

9. To the above principles we may add another, which has been stated in

the following terms by the Savilian Professor of Astronomy in the University

of Oxford.*

  "Principle 8. If there be any number of mutually exclusive hypotheses, A,,

k, h, . . of which the probabilities relative to a particular state of information
22

are p, p„ p, . . and if new information be given which changes the
    i2

probabilities of some of them, suppose of h,x and all that follow, without
                                                  m

having otherwise any reference to the rest; then the probabilities of these

latter have the same ratios to one another, after the new information, that they

had before, that is,

p\: p\: p\. . .: p' = p: p: p . . :p,
                mx22m

where the accented letters denote the values after the new information has

been acquired."This principle is apparently of a more fundamental character than the most

of those before enumerated, and perhaps it might, as has been suggested by

Professor Donkin, be regarded as axiomatic. It seems indeed to be founded in

the very definition of the measure of probability, as "the ratio of the number

of cases favourable to an event to the total number of cases favourable or

contrary, and all equally possible." For, adopting this definition, it is evident

that in whatever proportion the number of equally

• On certain Questions relating to the Theory of Probabilities; by W. F.

Donkin, M. A., F. B. S., &c. Philosophical Magazine, May, 1851.

possible cases is diminished, while the number of favourable cases remains

unaltered, in exactly the same proportion will the probabilities of any events

to which these cases have reference be increased. And as the new hypothesis,

viz., the diminution of the number of possible cases without affecting the

number of them which are favourable to the events in question, increases the

probabilities of those events in a constant ratio, the relative measures of those

probabilities remain unaltered. If the principle we are considering be then, as

it appears to be, inseparably involved in the very definition of probability, it

can scarcely, of itself, conduct us further than the attentive study of the

definition would alone do, in the solution of problems. From these

considerations it appears to be doubtful whether, without some aid of a

different kind from any that has yet offered itself to our notice, any

considerable advance, either in the theory of probabilities as a branch of

speculative knowledge, or in the practical solution of its problems can be

hoped for. And the establishment, solely upon the basis of any such collection

of principles as the above, of a method universally applicable to the solution

of problems, without regard either to the number or to the nature of the

propositions involved in the expression of their data, seems to be impossible.

For the attainment of such an object other elements are needed, the

consideration of which will ocscupy the next chapter. 
  CHAPTER XVII.

DEMONSTRATION OF A GENERAL METHOD FOR THE SOLUTION

OF PROBLEMS IN THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES.

1. TT has been defined (XVI. 2), that "the measure of the -*- probability of

an event is the ratio of the number of cases favourable to that event, to the

total number of cases favourable or unfavourable, and all equally possible."

In the following investigations the term probability will be used in the above

sense of " measure of probability."

  From the above definition we may deduce the following conclusions.

I. When it is certain that an event will occur, the probability of that event,

in the above mathematical sense, is 1. For the cases which are favourable to

the event, and the cases which are possible, are in this instance the same.

  Hence, also, ifp be the probability that an event x will happen, 1 - p will be

the probability that the said event will not happen. To deduce this result

directly from the definition, let TO be the number of cases favourable to the

event a;, n the number of cases possible, then n - TO is the number of cases

unfavourable to the event x. Hence, by definition,

— = probability that x will happen.

= probability that x will not happen.

But n — TO . TO

=1 = 1 - p.

n n

II. The probability of the concurrence of any two events is the product of

the probability of either of those events by the probability that if that event

occur, the other will occur also.

Let TO be the number of cases favourable to the happening of the first

event, and n the number of equally possible cases unfavourable to it; then the

probability of the first event is, bydefinition, . Of the m cases favourable to

the first event, let /

m + n

eases be favourable to the conjunction of the first and secondevents, then, by definition, — is the probability that if the first

event happen, the second also will happen. Multiplying these fractions

together, Ave have

m l_ I



m + n m m + n

But the resulting fraction has for its numerator the num

                                        m + n

ber of cases favourable to the conjunction of events, and for its denominator,

the number m + n of possible cases. Therefore, it represents the probability of

the joint occurrence of the two events.

  Hence, if p be the probability of any event x, and q the probability that if x

occur y will occur, the probability of the conjunction xy will be pq.

III. The probability that if an event x occur, the event y will occur, is a

fraction whose numerator is the probability of their joint occurrence, and

denominator the probability of the occurrence of the event x.

This is an immediate consequence of Principle 2nd.

IV. The probability of the occurrence of some one of a series of exclusive

events is equal to the sum of their separate probabilities.

For let n be the number of possible cases; m, the number of those cases

favourable to the first event; m, the number of cases favourable to the second,

&c. Then the separate probabilities of

the events are —, —, &c. Again, as the events are exclusive, n n

none of the cases favourable to one of them is favourable to

another; and, therefore, the number of cases favourable to some

one of the series will be m + m, . . , and the probability of some
                            x

one of the scries happening will be — '* * *. But this is the

sum of the previous fractions, —, —, &c. Whence the principle is manifest.2. DEFINITION.—Two events are said to be independent when the probability of

the happening of either of them is unaffected by our expectation of the

occurrence or failure of the other.

  From this definition, combined with Principle II., we have the following

conclusion:

V. The probability of the concurrence of two independent events is equal

to the product of the separate probabilities of those events.

For if p be the probability of an event x, q that of an event y regarded as

quite independent of x, then is q also the probability that if x occur y will

occur. Hence, by Principle II., pq is the probability of the concurrence of a;

and y.

Under the same circumstances, the probability that x will occur and y not

occur will be p (1 - q). For p is the probability that x will occur, and 1 - q the

probability that y will not occur. In like manner (1 - p) (1 - q) will be the

probabitity that both the events fail of occurring.

3. There exists yet another principle, different in kind from the above, but

necessary to the subsequent investigations of this chapter, before proceeding

to the explicit statement of which I desire to make one or two preliminary

observations.

I would, in the first place, remark that the distinction between simple and

compound events is not one founded in the nature of events themselves, but

upon the mode or connexion in which they are presented to the mind. How

many separate particulars, for instance, are implied in the terms " To be in

health," "To prosper," &c., each of which might still be regarded as

expressing a "simple event"? The prescriptive usages of language, which

have assigned to particular combinations of events single and definite

appellations, and have left unnumbered other combinations to be expressed

by corresponding combinations of distinct terms or phrases, is essentially

arbitrary. When, then, we designate as simple events those which are

expressed by a single verb, or by what grammarians term a simple sentence,

we do not thereby imply any real simplicity in the events themselves, but use

the term solely with reference to grammatical expression.

4. Now if this distinction of events, as simple or compound, is not founded

in their real nature, but rests upon the accidents of language, it cannot affectthe question of their mutual dependence or independence. If my knowledge

of two simple events is confined to this particular fact, viz., that the

probability of the occurrence of one of them is p, and that of the other q; then

I regard the events as independent, and thereupon affirm that the probability

of their joint occurrence is pq. But the ground of this affirmation is not that

the events are simple ones, but that the data afford no information whatever

concerning any connexion or dependence between them. When the

probabilities of events are given, but all information respecting their

dependence withheld, the mind regards them as independent. And this mode

of thought is equally correct whether the events, judged according to actual

expression, are simple or compound, i. e., whether each of them is expressed

by a single verb or by a combination of verbs.

5. Let it, however, be supposed that, together with the probabilities of

certain events, we possess some definite information respecting their possible

combinations. For example, let it be known that certain combinations are

excluded from happening, and therefore that the remaining combinations

alone are possible. Then still is the same general principle applicable. The

mode in which we avail ourselves of this information in the calculation of the

probability of any conceivable issue of events depends not upon the nature of

the events whose probabilities and whose limits of possible connexion are

given. It matters not whether they are simple or compound. It is indifferent

from what source, or by what methods, the knowledge of their probabilities

and of their connecting relations has been derived. We must regard the events

as independent of any connexion beside that of which we have information,

deeming it of no consequence whether such information has been explicitly

conveyed to us in the data, or thtnee deduced by logical inference. And this

leads us to the statement of the general principle in question, viz.:

VI. The events whose probabilities are given are to be regarded as

independent of any connexion but such as is either expressed, or necessarily

implied, in the data; and the mode in which our knowledge of that connexion

is to be employed is independent of the nature of the source from which such

knowledge has been derived.

The practical importance of the above principle consists in the

circumstance, that whatever may be the nature of the events whose

probabilities are given,—whatever the nature of the event whose probability

is sought, we are always able, by an application of the Calculus of Logic, todetermine the expression of the latter event as a definite combination of the

former events, and definitely to assign the whole of the implied relations

connecting the former events with each other. In other words, wo can

determine what that combination of the given events is whose probability is

required, and what combinations of them are alone possible. It follows then

from the above principle, that we can reason upon those events as if they

were simple events, whose conditions of possible combination had been

directly given by experience, and of which the probability of some definite

combination is sought. The possibility of a general method in probabilities

depends upon this reduction.

6. As the investigations upon which we are about to enter are based upon

the employment of the Calculus of Logic, it is necessary to explain certain

terms and modes of expression which are derived from this application.

By the event x, I mean that event of which the proposition

which affirms the occurrence is symbolically expressed by the

equation

a;- 1.

By the event </> (x, y, z,..), I mean that event of which the occurrence is

expressed by the equation

<p (*,y, *,..) = 1.

Such an event may be termed a compound event, in relation to

the simple events x, y, z, which its conception involves. Thus,

if x represent the event "It rains," y the event "It thunders,"

the separate occurrences of those events being expressed by the

logical equations

x - 1, y - 1,

then will x(l - y) + y (1 - x) represent the event or state of

things denoted by the Proposition, "It cither rains or thunders, but not both;"

the expression of that state of things being

x(l-y) + y(l-x) = l.If for brevity we represent the function <p (x, y, z, ..), used in the above

acceptation by V, it is evident (VI. 13) that the law of duality

P(l - V) = 0,

will be identically satisfied.

The simple events x, y, z will be said to be "conditioned" when they are not

free to occur in every possible combination; in other words, when some

compound event depending upon them is precluded from occurring. Thus the

events denoted by the propositions, "It rains," "It thunders," are "conditioned"

if the event denoted by the proposition, "It thunders, but does not rain," is

excluded from happening, so that the range of possible is less than the range

of conceivable combination. Simple unconditioned events are by definition

independent.

Any compound event is similarly said to be conditioned if it is assumed

that it can only occur under a certain condition, that is, in combination with

some other event constituting, by its presence, that condition.

7. We shall proceed in the natural order of thought, from simple and

unconditioned, to compound and conditioned events.

  PROPOSITION I.

1st. Ifp, q, r are the respective probabilities of any unconditioned simple

events x, y, z, the probability of any compound event V will be [P], this

function [P] being formed by changing, in the function V, the symbols x, y, z

into p, q, r, Sfc.

  2ndly. Under the same circumstances, the probability that if

the event V occur, any other event V will also occur, will be

[VV'~[

L
rI/1 , wherein [ PP] denotes the result obtained by multiplying

together the logical functions V and V', and changing in the result x, y, z, frc.

into p, q, r, Sfc.

Let us confine our attention in the first place to the possible combinations

of the two simple events, x and y, of which the respective probabilities are p

and q. The primary combinations of those events (V. 11), and theircorresponding probabilities, are as follows:

  EVENTS. PROBABILITIES.

xy, Concurrence of x and y, pq.

x (1 - y), Occurrence of x without y, p (1 - q).

(1 - x)y, Occurrence of y without x, (1 -p)q.

(1 - x) (1 - y), Conjoint failure of x and y, (1 -p) (1 - q).

We see that in these cases the probability of the compound event represented

by a constituent is the same function of p and q as the logical expression of

that event is of x and y; and it is obvious that this remark applies, whatever

may be the number of the simple events whose probabilities are given, and

whose joint existence or failure is involved in the compound event of which

we seek the probability.

  Consider, in the second place, any disjunctive combination of the above

constituents. The compound event, expressed in ordinary language as the

occurrence of " either the event x without the event y, or the event y without

the event x," is symbolically expressed in the form x(l-y)+y(l-X), and its

probability, determined by Principles iV. and V., is p (1 - q) + q (1 - p). The

latter of these expressions is the same function of p and q as the former is of x

and y. And it is obvious that this is also a particular illustration of a general

rule. The events which are expressed by any two or more constituents are

mutually exclusive. The only possible combination of them is a disjunctive

one, expressed in ordinary language by the conjunction or, in the language of

symbolical logic by the sign +. Now the probability of the occurrence of

some one out of a set of mutually exclusive events is the sum of their separate

probabilities, and is expressed by connecting the expressions for those

separate probabilities by the sign +. Thus the law above exemplified is seen

to be general. The probability of any unconditioned event V will be found by

changing in V the symbols x, y, z,.. into p, q,r, ..

8. Again, by Principle m., the probability that if the event V occur, the

event V will occur with it, is expressed by a fraction whose numerator is the

probability of the joint occurrence of V and V, and denominator the

probability of the occurrence of V.

Now the expression of that event, or state of things, which is constituted bythe joint occurrence of the events V and V, will be formed by multiplying

together the expressions V and V according to the rules of the Calculus of

Logic; since whatever constituents are found in both V and V will appear in

the product, and no others. Again, by what has just been shown, the

probability of the event represented by that product will be determined by

changing therein x, y, z into p, q, r, .. Hence the numerator sought will be

what \VV\ by definition represents. And the denominator will be [F],

wherefore

  [VV] Probability that if V occur, V will occur with it = -r
                                                                  rv

9. For example, if the probabilities of the simple events x, y, z are p, q, r

respectively, and it is required to find the probability that if either x or y

occur, then either y or z will occur, we have for the logical expressions of the

antecedent and consequent—


    1st. Either x or y occurs, x (1 - y) + y (1 - x). 

    2nd. Either y or z occurs, y (1 - z) + z (1 - y). 


If now we multiply these two expressions together according to the rules of

the Calculus of Logic, we shall have for the expression of the concurrence of

antecedent and consequent,

xz(l-y)+y(l-x)(l-z).

Changing in this result x, y, z into p, q, r, and similarly transforming the

expression of the antecedent, we find for the probability sought the value


    pr(l-q) + q(l -/>)(!-r) 

   p(l-q) + q(l-p) 


The special function of the calculus, in a case like the above, is to supply the

office of the reason in determining what are the conjunctures involved at once

in the consequent and the antecedent. But the advantage of this application is

almost entirely prospective, and will be made manifest in a subsequent

proposition.

  PROPOSITION II.

10. It is known that the probabilities of certain simple events x, //, z, . . are

p, q,r, .. respectively when a certain condition V is satisfied; V being inexpression a function ofx, y, z,.. Required the absolute probabilities of the

events x, y, z, . . , that is, the probabilities of their respective occurrence

independently of the condition V.

Jjetp, q', r\ &c., be the probabilities required, i. e. the probabilities of the

events x,y,z,.., regarded not only as simple, but as independent events. Then

by Prop. I. the probabilities that these events will occur when the condition V,

represented by the logical equation V= 1, is satisfied, are

[*F] \jy\r\ jzV]

in which [x V] denotes the result obtained by multiplying V by x, according to

the rules of the Calculus of Logic, and changing in the result x, y, z, into p, q',

r, &c. But the above conditioned probabilities are by hypothesis equal to p, q,

r, . . respectively. Hence we have,

        ?
Tnr w' TIT

                                                                                  1
from which system of equations equal in number to the quantities p', q, r', . .

, the values of those quantities may be determined.

Now x V consists simply of those constituents in V of which a; is a factor.

Let this sum be represented by V, and in like manner let yV be represented by
                                    x

V, &c. Our equations then assume the form
y

IT*] m . ...

where [ FJ denotes the results obtained by changing in V the symbols x, y, z,
                                                                  x

&c., into p, q, r, &c.

To render the meaning of the general problem and the principle of its

solution more evident, let us take the following example. Suppose that in the

drawing of balls from an urn attention had only been paid to those cases in

which the balls drawn were either of a particular colour, "white," or of a

particular composition, "marble," or were marked by both these characters,

no record having been kept of those cases in which a ball that was neither

white nor of marble had been drawn. Let it then have been found, that

whenever the supposed condition was satisfied, there was a probability/) that

a white ball would be drawn, and a probability q that a marble ball would be

drawn: and from these data alone let it be required to find the probability that

in the next drawing, without reference at all to the condition abovementioned, a white ball will be drawn; also the probability that a marble ball

will be drawn.

Here if x represent the drawing of a white ball, y that of a marble ball, the

condition V will be represented by the logical function

xy + x(l-y) + (l -x)y. Hence we have

V = xy + x(l-y)■x, V = xy + (l-x)y=y; whence
  xy

and the final equations of the problem arc

P £

                    p9
H+/0-SO + q(\-p) ' pV+p'^-ql + g'O-pl"''

from which we find

q p

It is seen that p and q are respectively proportional to p and q, as by

Professor Donkin's principle they ought to be. The solution of this class of

problems might indeed, by a direct application of that principle, be obtained.

To meet a possible objection, I here remark, that the above reasoning does

not require that the drawings of a white and a marble ball should be

independent, in virtue of the physical constitution of the balls. The

assumption of their independence is indeed involved in the solution, but it

does not rest upon any prior assumption as to the nature of the balls, and their

relations, or freedom from relations, of form, colour, structure, &c. It is

founded upon our total ignorance of all these things. Probability always has

reference to the state' of our actual knowledge, and its numerical value varies

with varying information.

                                        PROPOSITION III.

11. To determine in any question of probabilities the logical connexion of

the quasitum with the data; that is, to assign the event whose probability is

sought, as a logical function of the event whose probabilities are given.

Let S, T, &c., represent any compound events whose probabilities are

given, S and T being in expression known functions of the symbols x, y, z,

&c., representing simple events. Similarly let W represent any event whose

probability is sought, W being also a known function of x, y, z, &c. As S, T, . .W must satisfy the fundamental law of duality, we are permitted to replace

them by single logical symbols, s, t, . . w. Assume

then

                                  * = S, t=T, w = W.

These, by the definition of S, T, . . W, will be a series of logical equations

connecting the symbols s,t,.. w, with the symbols x,y,z ..

By the methods of the Calculus of Logic we can eliminate from the above

system any of the symbols x, y, z, . ., representing events whose probabilities

are not given, and determine w as a developed function of s, t, &c., and of

such of the symbols x, y, z, &c., if any such there be, as correspond to events

whose probabilities are given. The result will be of the form

                                      W-A + 0B + QC + ^D,

where A, B, C, and D comprise among them all the possible constituents

which can be formed from the symbols s, t, &c., i. e. from all the symbols

representing events whose probabilities are given.

The above will evidently be the complete expression of the relation sought.

For it fully determines the event W, represented by the single symbol w, as a

function or combination of the events similarly denoted by the symbols s, t,

&c., and it assigns by the laws of the Calculus of Logic the condition

D = 0, as connecting the events s, t, &c., among themselves. We may,

therefore, by Principle vI., regard s, t, &c., as simple events, of which the

combination to, and the condition with which it is associated J), are definitely

determined.

  Uniformity in the logical processes of reduction being desirable, I shall

here state the order which will generally be pursued.

12. By (VIII. 8), the primitive equations are reducible to the forms

  «(l-5) + 5(l-«)-0;

t(l-T)+T(l-t)-0; (1)



w(l-W)+W(l-w)=0;under which they can be added together without impairing their significance.

We can then eliminate the symbols x, y, z, either separately or together. If the

latter course is chosen, it is necessary, after adding together the equations of

the system, to develop the result with reference to all the symbols to be

eliminated, and equate to 0 the product of all the coefficients of the

constituents (VII. 9).

As w is the symbol whose expression is sought, we may also, by Prop. HI.

Chap, iX., express the result of elimination in the form

Ew + E(l - to) = 0.

E and E being successively determined by making in the general system

(1), to = 1 and to - 0, and eliminating the symbols x, y, z, . . Thus the single

equations from which E and E are to be respectively determined become

B (1 - S) + 5(1 -1) + t(l - T) + 2\1 - f) .. + 1 - W='o
                                                          ;

s(l-S) + S(l-s) + t(l-T)+ 7X1-0+ W-0.

From these it only remains to eliminate x, y, z, &c., and to determine to by

subsequent developments

In the process of elimination we may, if needful, avail ourselves of the

simplifications of Props, I. and n. Chap. iX.

13. Should the data, beside informing us of the probabilities of events,

further assign among them any explicit connexion, such connexion must be

logically expressed, and the equation or equations thus formed be introduced

into the general system.

                                        PROPOSITION IV.

14. Given the probabilities of any system of events; to determine by a

general method the consequent or derived probability of any other event.

As in the last Proposition, let S, T, &c., be the events whose probabilities

are given, Wthe event whose probability is sought, these being known

functions of x, y, z, &c. Let us represent the data as follows:

  Probability of S = p;

  Probability of T= q; ^'and so on, p, q, &a, being known numerical values. If then we represent the

compound event S by s, T by t, and W by w, we find by the last proposition,

w = A + OB + ^C+^D; (2)

A, B, C, and D being functions of*, t, &c. Moreover the data (1) are

transformed into

Prob. s=p, Prob. t = q, &c. (3)

Now the equation (2) is resolvable into the system

                                    w = A + aC 1

        (4)
D-i \ 

q being an indefinite class symbol (VI. 12). But since by the properties of

constituents (V. Prop. in.), we have

                                    A + B+C+D~l,

the second equation of the above system may be expressed in the

form

                                    A + B+ C= 1.

If we represent the function A + B + C by V, the system (4) becomes

                                                                        w = A + qC\ (5)

                                                                                  P-L (6)

Let us for a moment consider this result. Since V is the sum of a series of

constituents of s, t, &c., it represents the compound event in which the simple

events involved are those denoted by *, t, &c. Hence (6) shows that the

events denoted by s, t, &c., and whose probabilities are p, q, &c., have such

probabilities not as independent events, but as events subject to a certain

condition V. Equation (5) expresses w as a similarly conditioned combination

of the same events.

Now by Principle vI. the mode in which this knowledge of the connexion

of events has been obtained does not influence the mode in which, when

obtained, it is to be employed. We must reason upon it as if experience had

presented to us the events s, t, &c., as simple events, free to enter into everycombination, but possessing, when actually subject to the condition V, the

probabilities p, q, &c., respectively.

Let then p', q",.., be the corresponding probabilities of such events, when

the restriction V is removed. Then by Prop. II. of the present chapter, these

quantities will be determined by the system of equations,

            =<KC
rjn~P, ry-\  9, -' l«)

and by Prop. i. the probability of the event w under the same

condition V will be

„ . \A + cC]

                                                                              L
                                                                  Prob. W =  ry-,- i (8)

wherein V, denotes the sum of those constituents in V of which * is a factor,

and [ F,] what that sum becomes when s, t, .. , are changed into p', q, . .,

respectively. The constant c represents the probability of the indefinite event

q; it is, therefore, arbitrary, and admits of any value from 0 to 1.

Now it will be observed, that the values of//, q", &c., are determined from

(7) only in order that they may be substituted in (8), so as to render Prob. w a

function of known quantities, p, q, &c. It is obvious, therefore, that instead of

the letters p', q', &c.,

we might employ any others as s, t, &c., in the same quantitative

acceptations. This particular step would simply involve a change

of meaning of the symbols s, t, &c.—their ceasing to be logical,

and becoming quantitative. The systems (7) and (8) would then

become

V V

    m9
-yPt -y-q, *°«i ()

Prob.  = ^—-. (10)
        w

In employing these, it is only necessary to determine from (9) *, t, &c.,

regarded as quantitative symbols, in terms ofp, q, &c., and substitute the

resulting values in (10). It is evident, that s, t, &c., inasmuch as they representprobabilities, will be positive proper fractions.

The system (9) may be more symmetrically expressed in the

form

V V.

—' = -li..= F. (11)

p q *

Or we may express both (9) and (10) together in the symmetrical system

  Z,V....±Ls£.v 
    -s(l2)

    v
p q u '

wherein « represents Prob. w.

15. It remains to interpret the constant c assumed to represent the

probability of the indefinite event q. Now the logical equation

                                      w = A + qC,

interpreted in the reverse order, implies that if either the event A take place,

or the event C in connexion with the event q, the event w will take place, and

not otherwise. Hence q represents that condition under which, if the event C

take place, the event w will take place. But the probability of q is c. Hence,

therefore, c = probability that if the event C take place the event w will take

place.

  Wherefore by Principle n.,

                                                c
  Probability of concurrence of C and w  Probability of C' We may hence

determine the nature of that new experience from which the actual value of c

may be obtained. For if we substitute in C for s, t, &c., their original

expressions as functions of the simple events x, y, z, &c., we shall form the

expression of that event whose probability constitutes the denominator of the

above value of c; and if we multiply that expression by the original

expression of to, we shall form the expression of that event whose probability

constitutes the numerator of c, and the ratio of the frequency of this event to

that of the former one, determined by new observations, will give the value of

c. Let it be remarked here, that the constant c does not necessarily make itsappearance in the solution of a problem. It is only when the data are

insufficient to render determinate the probability sought, that this arbitrary

element presents itself, and in this case it is seen that the final logical

equation (2) or (5) informs us how it is to be determined.

If that new experience by which c may be determined cannot be obtained,

we can still, by assigning to c its limiting values 0 and 1, determine the limits

of the probability of to. These are


              A 

    Minor limit of Prob. w = -=. 


  Superior limit = —^—.

Between these limits, it is certain that the probability sought must lie

independently of all new experience which does not absolutely contradict the

past.

If the expression of the event C consists of many constituents, the logical

value of to being of the form

we can, instead of employing their aggregate as above, present the final

solution in the form


    _ , A + cCi + CjsC, + &c. 
              x

    Jrrob. to = == . 


Here ^ = probability that if the event C, occur, the event w will occur, and so

on for the others. Convenience must decide which form is to be preferred.

16. The above is the complete theoretical solution of the problem

proposed. It may be added, that it is applicable equally to the case in which

any of the events mentioned in its original statement are conditioned. Thus, if

one of the data is the probability p, that if the event x ofccur the event y will

occur; the probability of the occurrence of x not being given, we must assume

Prob. x = c (an arbitrary constant), then Prob. xy = cp, and these two

conditions must be introduced into the data, and employed according to the

previous method. Again, if it is sought to determine the probability that if an

event x occur an event y will occur, the solution will assume the form

T2 t. u Prob. xy    Prob. sought =  , , 
                      n

               Prob. x 


the numerator and denominator of which must be separately determined by

the previous general method.

17. We are enabled by the results of these investigations to establish a

general rule for the solution of questions in probabilities.

  GENERAL RULE.

  CASE I.— When all the events are unconditioned.

  Form the symbolical expressions of the events whose probabilities are

given or sought.

  Equate such of those expressions as relate to compound events to a new

series of symbols, s, t, &c., which symbols regard as representing the events,

no longer as compound but simple, to whose expressions they have been

equated.

  Eliminate from the equations thus formed all the logical symbols, except

those which express events, s, t, &c., whose respective probabilities p, q, &c.

are given, or the event w whose probability is sought, and determine to as a

developed function of *, t, &c. in the form

Let A + B + C = V, and let V, represent the aggregate of those constituents

in V which contain « as a factor, V of those which contain t as a factor, and
                                      t

thus for all the symbols whose probabilities are given.

Then, passing from Logic to Algebra, form the equations

                                                                              %-%-r, (i)

                                          p q

                                                                        Prob.to = ^-^, (2)

from (1) determine s, t, &c. as functions of p, q, &c., and substitute their

values in (2). The result will express the solution required.

Or form the symmetrical system of equations


    VH V, A + cC V       ==u
    P  1 "  



                                                                                      V (3)



where u represents the probability sought.

If c appear in the solution, its interpretation will be

              =
Prob. Cw °  Prob. c'

and this interpretation indicates the nature of the experience which is

necessary for its discovery.

  CASK II.— When some of the events are conditioned.

If there be given the probability p that if the event X occur, the event Y will

occur, and if the probability of the antecedent X be not given, resolve the

proposition into the two following,

viz.:


    Probability of X = c, 

    Probability of Xy = cp. 


If the quesitum be the probability that if the event W occur, the event Z will

occur, determine separately, by the previous case, the terms of the fraction


    Prob. WZ 

 Prob. W' 


and the fraction itself will express the probability sought.

It is understood in this case that X, Y, fV, Z may be any compound events

whatsoever. The expressions X Y and WZ represent the products of the

symbolical expressions of X and Y and of W and Z, formed according to the

rules of the Calculus of Logic.

The determination of the single constant c may in certain cases be resolved

into, or replaced by, the determination of a series of arbitrary constants c c. .
                                                                                    „2

according to convenience, as previously explained.18. It has been stated (I. 12) that there exist two distinct definitions, or

modes of conception, upon which the theory of probabilities may be made to

depend, one of them being connected more immediately with Number, the

other more directly with Logic. We have now considered the consequences

which flow from the numerical definition, and have shown how it conducts

us to a point in which the necessity of a connexion with Logic obviously

suggests itself. We have seen to some extent what is the nature of that

connexion; and further, in what manner the peculiar processes of Logic, and

the more familiar ones of quantitative Algebra, are involved in the same

general method of solution, each of these so accomplishing its own object

that the two processes may be regarded as supplementary to each other. It

remains to institute the reverse order of investigation, and, setting out from a

definition of probability in which the logical relation is more immediately

involved, to show how the numerical definition would thence arise, and how

the same general method, equally dependent upon both elements, would

finally, but by a different order of procedure, be established.

That between the symbolical expressions of the logical calculus and those

of Algebra there exists a close analogy, is a fact to which attention has

frequently been directed in the course of the present treatise. It might even be

said that they possess a community of forms, and, to a very considerable

degree, a community of laws. With a single exception in the latter respect,

their difference is only one of interpretation. Thus the same expression

admits of a logical or of a quantitative interpretation, according to the

particular meaning which we attach to the symbols it involves. The

expression xy represents, under the former condition, a concurrence of the

events denoted by x and y; under the latter, the product of the numbers or

quantities denoted by x and y. And thus every expression denoting an event,

simple or compound, admits, under another system of interpretation, of a

meaning purely quantitative. Here then arises the question, whether there

exists any principle of transition, in accordance with which the logical and

the numerical interpretations of the same symbolical expression shall have an

intelligible connexion. And to this question the following considerations

afford an answer.

19. Let it be granted that there exists such a feeling as expectation, a

feeling of which the object is the occurrence of events, and which admits of

differing degrees of intensity. Let it also be granted that this feeling ofexpectation accompanies our knowledge of the circumstances under which

events are produced, and that it varies with the degree and kind of that

knowledge. Then, without assuming, or tacitly implying, that the intensity of

the feeling of expectation, viewed as a mental emotion, admits of precise

numerical measurement, it is perfectly legitimate to inquire into the

possibility of a mode of numerical estimation which shall, at least, satisfy

these following conditions, viz., that the numerical value which it assigns

shall increase when the known circumstances of an event are felt to justify a

stronger expectation, shall diminish when they demand a weaker expectation,

and shall remain constant when they obviously require an equal degree of

expectation.

Now these conditions at least will be satisfied, if we assume the

fundamental principle of expectation to be this, viz., that the laws for the

expression of expectation, viewed as a numerical element, shall be the same

as the laws for the expression of the expected event viewed as a logical

element. Thus if 0 (x, y, z) represent any unconditional event compounded in

any manner of the events x, y, z, let the same expression ip (x, y, z), according

to the above principle, denote the expectation of that event; x, y, z

representing no longer the simple events involved, but the expectations of

those events.

  For, in the first place, it is evident that, under this hypothesis, the

probability of the occurrence of some one of a set of mutually exclusive

events will be equal to the sum of the separate probabilities of those events.

Thus if the alternation in question consist of n mutually exclusive events

whose expressions are

0i(*, y, *), $ (x, y,z), fa (x, y, z),
                2

the expression of that alternation will be

  <pi(x,y,z) + <p(x,y,z) . . + <j,(x,y,z) = 1;
                    in

the literal symbols x, y, z being logical, and relating to the simple events of

which the three alternatives are compounded: and, by hypothesis, the

expression of the probability that some one of those alternatives will occur is

0i (x> V, z) + 0s (*, y, *) . . + 0n (x, y, z),

x, y, z here denoting the probabilities of the above simple events. Now thisexpression increases, cateris paribus, with the increase of the number of the

alternatives which are involved, and diminishes with the diminution of their

number; which is agreeable to the condition stated.

  Furthermore, if we set out from the above hypothetical definition of the

measure of probability, we shall be conducted, either by necessary inference

or by successive steps of suggestion, which might perhaps be termed

necessary, to the received numerical definition. We are at once led to

recognise unity (1) as the proper numerical measure of certainty. For it is

certain that any event x or its contrary 1 - x will occur. The expression of this

proposition is

  *+(l-*)=l,

whence, by hypothesis, x+ (1 - x), the measure of the probability of the above

proposition, becomes the measure of certainty. But the value of that

expression is 1, whatever the particular value of x may be. Unity, or 1, is

therefore, on the hypothesis in question, the measure of certainty.

Let there, in the next place, be n mutually exclusive, but equally possible

events, which we will represent by <u t„ .. t. The proposition which affirms
                                                  n

that some one of these must occur will be expressed by the equation

t, + t.. + t = 1;
    2n

and, as when we pass in accordance with the reasoning of the

last section to numerical probabilities, the same equation remains

true in form, and as the probabilities t„ t. ,t are equal, we
                                              2n

have

nt = 1,
x

whence t, = -, and similarly t, = -,£„ = -. Suppose it then ren n n

quired to determine the probability that some one event of the

partial series t, i,. . f,„ will occur, we have for the expression
              2

required


    tx + £, .. + t = - + -.. to m terms 
                  m               n n 


    m 

    n 


Hence, therefore, if there are m cases favourable to the occurrence of a

particular alternation of events out of n possible and equally probable cases,

the probability of the occurrence of that

                                                                                        TIi

alternation will be expressed by the fraction —.

Now the occurrence of any event which may happen in different equally

possible ways is really equivalent to the occurrence of an alternation, i. e., of

some one out of a set of alternatives. Hence the probability of the occurrence

of any event may be expressed by a fraction whose numerator represents the

number of cases favourable to its occurrence, and denominator the total

number of equally possible cases. But this is the rigorous numerical

definition of the measure of probability. That definition is therefore involved

in the more peculiarly logical definition, the consequences of which we have

endeavoured to trace.

20. From the above investigations it clearly appears, 1st, that whether we

set out from the ordinary numerical definition of the measure of probability,

or from the definition which assigns to the numerical measure of probability

such a law of value as shall establish a formal identity between the logical

expressions of events and the algebraic expressions of their values, we shall

be led to the same system of practical results. 2ndly, that either of these

definitions pursued to its consequences, and considered in connexion with the

relations which it inseparably involves, conducts us, by inference or

suggestion, to the other definition. To a scientific view of the theory of

probabilities it is essential that both principles should be viewed together, in

their mutual bearing and dependence.  CHAPTER XVIII.

ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GENERAL METHOD IN

PROBABILITIES.

1 . XT is designed here to illustrate, by elementary examples, -*- the

general method demonstrated in the last chapter. The examples chosen will

be chiefly such as, from their simplicity, permit a ready verification of the

solutions obtained. But some intimations will appear of a higher class of

problems, hereafter to be more fully considered, the analysis of which would

be incomplete without the aid of a distinct method determining the necessary

conditions among their data, in order that they may represent a possible

experience, and assigning the corresponding limits of the final solutions. The

fuller consideration of that method, and of its applications, is reserved for the

next chapter.

2. EX. 1.—The probability that it thunders upon a given day is p, the

probability that it both thunders and hails is q, but of the connexion of the

two phenomena of thunder and hail, nothing further is supposed to be known.

Required the probability that it hails on the proposed day.


    Let x represent the event—It thunders. 

    Let y represent the event—It hails. 


Then xy will represent the event—It thunders and hails; and the data of the

problem are

Prob. x - p, Prob. xy = q.

There being here but one compound event xy involved, assume,

according to the rule,

                                                                              xy = u. (1)

Our data then become

Prob. x = p, Prob.« = q; (2)

and it is required to find Prob. y. Now (1) givesy=gmwtgu(l-9)+0(1-nz+g1-u)(l-a).

Hence (XVIL 17) we find
Veu+(l-w)z+(l-u)(l-a),
Ve=wr+(1-wz=2, Vi-us;

and the equations of the General Rule, viz.,

e Va
e

. A+ eC
Prob. y =

become, on substitution, and observing that A = ux, C = (1 - «) (1 - x), and

that Freduces to x + (1 - a) (1 - x),

£=y = * + 0-«)0-*), (3)

                                  „ IBB + c(l-ti) (1-a)

^= «i-«)0-«)'

from which we readily deduce, by elimination of x and «,

Prob. y = q + c(l-p). (5)

In thiB result c represents the unknown probability that if the event (1 -u) (1 -

x) happen, the event y will happen. Now (1 - a) (1 - x) = (1 - xy) (1 - x) - 1 -

a;, on actual multiplication. Hence c is the unknown probability that if it do

not thunder, it will hail.

The general solution (5) may therefore be interpreted as follows :—The

probability that it hails is equal to the probability that it thunders and hails, q,

together with the probability that it does not thunder, 1 -p, multiplied by the

probability c, that if it does not thunder it will hail. And common reasoning

verifies this result.

If c cannot be numerically determined, we find, on assigning to it the

limiting values 0 and 1, the following limits of Prob. y, viz.:


    Inferior limit = q. 

    Superior limit = q + 1 - p. 3. Ex. 2.—The probability that one or both of two events
happen is p, that one or both of them fail is . What is the
‘probability that only one of these happens ?

Let = and y represent the respective events, then the data
e Prob.ay+z (1-y) +(1-2)y=p,

Prob.z(l-y)+(1-5)y+(1-2) (1-9)=¢5
and we are to find
Prob.z(1 - y) +y(1-2).
Heroall the cvents concerned being compound, assume
ay+z(l-y)+ (1-2)y=1
(- +(1-Dy+(1-2)(1-y) =t
2(1-y)+(1-2)y =w.
Then climinating z and y, and determining w as a developed
function of s and ¢, we find

w:-n+0:(171)+0(l~:)u%(l—‘)(l—t).

Hence A=st, C=0, Vast+s(1-t)+(1-s)t=s+(1-9)¢
V.=3, V;=t; and the equations of the General Rule (X VIL. 17)
become

i (-0t W

L =

N
wie
                                        Prob. to



'* + (l -«)*'

whence we find, on eliminating s and t,

Prob. to =p + q ~ 1.

Hence p + q - 1 is the measure of the probability sought. This result may be

verified as follows:—Since p is the probability that one or both of the given

events occur, 1 - p will be the probability that they both fail; and since q is

the probability that one or both fail, 1 - q is the probability that they both

happen. Hence 1 - p + 1 - q, or 2 -p - q, is the probability that they either both

happen or both fail. But the only remaining alternative which is possible is

that one alone of the events happens. Hence the probability of this occurrence

is 1 - (2 - p - q), or p + q - 1, as above.4. EX. 3.—The probability that a witness A speaks the truth is p, the

probability that another witness B speaks the truth is q, and the probability

that they disagree in a statement is r. What is the probability that if they

agree, their statement is true?

Let x represent the hypothesis that A speaks truth; y that B speaks truth;

then the hypothesis that A and B disagree in their statement will be

represented by x (1 -y) + y(l-x); the hypothesis that they agree in statement

by xy + (1 - x) (1 - y), and the hypothesis that they agree in the truth by xy.

Hence we have the following data:

Prob. x = p, Prob.y = y, Prob. a;(l - y) + y (1 - x) = r,

from which we are to determine


        Prob. xy 

    Prob. xy + (1 - x) (1 - y)' 


But as Prob. x (1 - y) + y (1 - x) = r, it is evident that Prob. ry + (l-a;)(l-y) will

be 1 - r; we have therefore to seek


    Prob. xy 

 l-r • 


Now the compound events concerned being in expression, x (1 - y) + y (1 -

x) and xy, let us assume

Z(1 -y) + y(l -x) = szy  =w J

Our data then are Prob. 2 = p, Prob.y = g, Prob.s = 7, and we
are to find Prob. w.
The system (1) gives, on reduction,

(#(1-9)+y(1-2)) A-0) +sfay+ (1-2) A=)}
day(l-w)+w(l-29)=0;

whence

0aZ=9)(1-0) +y(1-2) (1-0) tazy+s(1-2) (1 -p) +ay

2y 1
sy (-9 40 -y)e e (1-9) (1)

S00-gps JA-D(-Perf-gya-g P

+0(1-2)(1-9) (1 -4).
In the expression of this development, the coefficient [il has been
made to replace every equivalent form (X. 6). Here we have

Veaay(l-9)+z(1-y)s+(-2)ys+ (1 -2) (1 -y) (1-8);3
whence, passing from Logic to Algebra,
2y (1-5) +e(l-p)s _my(1-9)+(-a)ye

& ! e0-pes(-ay

may(l-+a(l-p)s+(Q-2)ye+ (1 -2)(1-g) (1 -9).

 

y(
Brob- e = T s (=g e+ (15 g+

from which we readily deduce

 

 

 

Pmbm:l’*g 5
whence we have

Prob.ay _prg-r

T=r C3=p ®

 

for the valuo sought.

Ifin the same way we seck the probability that if 4 and B
agree in their statement, that statement will bo false, we must
replace the sccond equation of the eystem (1) by the following,
viz.:

A-2)A-p)=w;
the final logical equation will then be

0o Lyt 0my(L-9) + 02 (L-p) s+ o (1-9) (1-9)
+D(Ifz)yl-&%(lfz)y(lfl)+%(lfz)(lfy)l
(- A-n)(A-9);5 (4

whence, proceeding s before, we finally deduce

 

Prob.w = i;ﬂ__' : ®)

‘Wherefore we have
  Prob.(l-a;)(l-y) _ 2-p-g-r

                W
1-r ~ 2(1-r) 

for the value here sought.

  These results are mutually consistent. For since it is certain that the jointstatement of A and B must be either true or false, the second members of (3)

and (5) ought by addition to make 1. Now we have identically,

p + q-r 2-p-q-r

          +
2 (1-r)  2(1-r)'

It is probable, from the simplicity of the results (5) and (6), that they might

easily be deduced by the application of known principles; but it is to be

remarked that they do not fall directly within the scope of known methods.

The number of the data exceeds that of the simple events which they involve.

M. Cournot, in his very able work, "Exposition de la Theorie des Chances,"

has proposed, in such cases as the above, to select from the original premises

different sets of data, each set equal in number to the simple events which

they involve, to assume that those simple events are independent, determine

separately from the respective sets of the data their probabilities, and

comparing the different values thus found for the same elements, judge how

far the assumption of independence is justified. This method can only

approach to correctness when the said simple events prove, according to the

above criterion, to be nearly or quite independent; and in the questions of

testimony and of judgment, in which such an hypothesis is adopted, it seems

doubtful whether it is justified by actual experience of the ways of men.

5. EX. 4.—From observations made during a period of general sickness,

there was a probability p that any house taken at random in a particular

district was visited by fever, a probability q that it was visited by cholera, and

a probability r that it escaped both diseases, and was not in a defective

sanitary condition as regarded cleanliness and ventilation. What is the

probability that any house taken at random was in a defective sanitary

condition?

  With reference to any house, let us appropriate the symbols x, y, z, as

follows, viz.:“Lhe gymbol z to the visitation of fever.
v » cholera.
= defective sanitary condition.

The events whoso probabilities are given aro then denoted by
2, y,and (1-2) (1 - y) (1- 2), the event whose probability is
sought is z. Assume then,

(-2 (1-p) (1-2)=w;
then our data are,
Prob.z=p, Prob.y=g, Prob.w=r
and we are to find Prob. z. Now (1) gives
L =n(-p-w
T-5(-y)

1 0 1 0
=gty (-w)+ga(l-uiga(-y(1-w)

 

43 -2y 3 (1-2)y (1-w) +0 (1-2) (1-5) w
+(1-2)A-y)(A-w) (1)
The value of ¥ doduced from the above is
Vezy(l-w)+z(1-p)(1-w)+(1-2)y(l-v)
+(L-2)(1-g)w+ (1-) (1-p) (1= 0) = 1=+ 0 (1-2) (1 - )3
and similacly oducing Vi, Vs Vi we got
Veez(l-w), Vy=y(l-w), Ve=w(l-z)(1-);
fumishing the algebraic equations
ﬁ%ﬂ:m%z-w:l—w-fw(l—z)(l—y), @
As respects those terms of the development characterized by
the coeffcients J, T shal,instead of collcting them into asngle

term, present them, for the sake of variety (XVII. 18), in the
form :

gz(l-w)+§(1-z)y(1-w); @

the value of Prob. z will then be
p _ (\-x) (l-y) (l-v>) + cx(l-w) + c'(l\-X) 7, (l-w)
rob

                  K;
l-w + w(l-x)(l-y) ,

  From (2) and (4) we deduce                                      r
Prob. z = i -—r^ '- + cp + d±-±  S

                                        l—r l — r

as the expression of the probability required. If in this result we make c = 0,

and c - 0, we find for an inferior limit of its value

'-—-^ - -; and if we make c = 1, c'= 1. we obtain

1 - T

for its superior limit 1 - r.

6. It appears from inspection of this solution, that the premises chosen

were exceedingly defective. The constants c and c indicate this, and the

corresponding terms (3) of the final logical equation Bhow how the

deficiency is to be supplied. Thus, since

*(1 - w) = x {1 - (1 - x) (1 - y) (1 - z)) =a;, (l-*)y(l-w)-(l-*)y{l-(l-*)(l-y)(l-

^)}-(l-*)y,

we learn that c is the probability that if any house was visited by fever its

sanitary condition is defective, and that c is the probability that if any house

was visited by cholera without fever, its sanitary condition was defective.

If the terms of the logical development affected by the coefficient - had

been collected together as in the direct statement of

the general rule, the final solution would have assumed the following form:

          lprr
  I.rob.zJ--^l-*-hc(p  -J^
                          +q

c here representing the probability that if a house was visited by either or

both of the diseases mentioned, its sanitary condition was defective. This

result is perfectly consistent with the former one, and indeed the necessary

equivalence of the different forms of solution presented in such cases may be

formally established. The above solution may be verified in particular cases.

Thus, taking the second form, if c = 1 we find Prob. z = 1 - r, a correct result.

For if the presence of either fever or cholera certainly indicated a defective

sanitary condition, the probability that any house would be in a defective

sanitary state would be simply equal to the probability that it was not found

in that category denoted by z, the probability of which would, by the data, be

1 - r. Perhaps the general verification of the above solution would be difficult.The constants p, q, and r in the above solution are subject to the conditions

p+ r<l, q + r< 1.

7. EX. 5.—Given the probabilities of the premises of a hypothetical

syllogism to find the probability of the conclusion. Let the syllogism in its

naked form be as follows:


    Major premiss: If the proposition Y is true X is true. 

    Minor premiss: If the proposition Z is true Y is true. 

      Conclusion: If the proposition Z is true X is true. 


Suppose the probability of the major premiss to be p, that of the minor

premiss q.

The data then are as follows, representing the proposition X by x, &c., and

assuming c and c as arbitrary constants:

Prob. y = c, Prob. xy = cp;

Prob. 2 = d, Prob. yz = dq;

from which we are to determine,

Prob. xz Prob. xz

T3 r— or;

Jrrob. z c

Let us assume,

xy = u, yz -v, xz = to;

then, proceeding according to the usual method to determine w as a

developed function of y, z, u, and v, the symbols corresponding to

propositions whose probabilities are given, we find

w = uzvy + Ou (1 - z) (1 - v) y + 0 (1 - u) zvy

+ ^(l-u)z(l-v)(l-y)+0(l-u)(l-z)(l-v)y + 0 (1 - u) (1 - z) (1 -») (1 - y) + terms

whose coefficients are -;and passing from Logic to Algebra,

uzoy+u(1-2) (1-v) y _uzvy+(1-w)zoy + (1-w)z (1-)(1-y)
e — 7
uzmy + (1-u) zvy
- G
ey su(1-2) (1-0)y+ (1-0) sy s (1-u)(1-2) (1=0)y_,
s B

Prob.w ="ﬂi(,‘;");(‘,: 9(-g)
wherein
Ve +u(1-2)(1=0) g+ (1~u) 2y + (1-u) (1-2) (1 -9)
(=) (1=2) (=) y+ A-0)(1-2) A=) (1- ),
the solution of this system of equations gives
Prob.w = épg + ac (1 - g),

Prob. 1y
2

whence

 

=pg+a(l-g)
the value required. In this expression the arbitrary constant a is the

probability that if the proposition Z is true and Y false, X is true. In other

words, it is the probability, that if the minor premiss is false, the conclusion is

true.

This investigation might have been greatly simplified by assuming the

proposition Ztobe true, and then seeking the probability of X. The data would

have been simply

Prob. y - q, Prob. xy =pq;

whence we should have found Prob. x = pq + a (1 - q). It is evident that under

the circumstances this mode of procedure would have been allowable, but I

have preferred to deduce the solution by the direct and unconditioned

application of the method. The result is one which ordinary reasoning

verifies, and which it does not indeed require a calculus to obtain. General

methods are apt to appear most cumbrous when applied to cases in which

their aid is the least required.

Let it be observed, that the above method is equally applicable to the

categorical syllogism, and not to the syllogism only, but to every form of

deductive ratiocination. Given the probabilities separately attaching to the

premises of any train of argument; it is always possible by the above methodto determine the consequent probability of the truth of a conclusion

legitimately drawn from such premises. It is not needful to remind the reader,

that the truth and the correctness of a conclusion are different things.

8. One remarkable circumstance which presents itself in such applications

deserves to be specially noticed. It is, that propositions which, when true, are

equivalent, are not necessarily equivalent when regarded only as probable.

This principle will be illustrated in the following example.

EX. 6.—Given the probability p of the disjunctive proposition "Either the

proposition Yis true, or both the propositions X and Y are false," required the

probability of the conditional proposition, "If the proposition X is true, Yis

true."

Let x and y be appropriated to the propositions X and Y respectively. Then

we have

Prob. y + (1 - x) (1 - y) = p,

from which it is required to find the value of -=;—^—-.

                                                                                    Prob. x

Assume y + (1 - x) (1 - y) = t. (1)

Eliminating y we get

  (l-x)(l-0 = 0.

whence 0 . ,

and proceeding in the usual way,

                                                              Prob. x = 1 - p + cp. (2)

Where c is the probability that if either Y is true, or X and Y false, X is true.

Next to find Prob. xy. Assume

                                                                              xy = w. (3)

Eliminating y from (1) and (3) we get)

z (1 - t) - 0;

whence, proceeding as above,Prob. z - cp,

c having the same interpretation as before. Hence

Prob. xy cp

Prob. x 1 - p+ cp'

for the probability of the truth of the conditional proposition given.

Now in the science of pure Logic, which, as such, is conversant only with

truth and with falsehood, the above disjunctive and conditional propositions

are equivalent. They are true and they are false together. It is seen, however,

from the above investigation, that when the disjunctive proposition has a

probability p, the conditional proposition has a different and partly indefinite

probability - . Nevertheless these expressions

are such, that when either of them becomes 1 or 0, the other assumes the

same value. The results are, therefore, perfectly consistent, and the logical

transformation serves to verify the formula deduced from the theory of

probabilities.

The reader will easily prove by a similar analysis, that if the probability of

the conditional proposition were given as p, that of the disjunctive

proposition would be 1 - c + cp, where c is the arbitrary probability of the

truth of the proposition X.

9. EX. 7.—Required to determine the probability of an event x, having

given either the first, or the first and second, or the first, second, and third of

the following data, viz.:

1st. The probability that the event x occurs, or that it alone of the three

events x, y, z, fails, is p.

2nd. The probability that the event y occurs, or that it alone of the three

events x, y, z, fails, is q.

3rd. The probability that the event z occurs, or that it alone of the three

events x, y, z, fails, is r.

  SOLUTION OF THE FIRST CASE.

Here we suppose that only the first of the above data is We have then,

Prob. {x + (1 - x) yz] = p, to find Prob. x.Let * + (1 - x) yz = *,

then eliminating yz as a single symbol, we get,

x(l-s) = 0. Hence

  *-zi-o» <-«)'

whence, proceeding according to the rule, we have

                                                                        Prob. x = cp, (I)

where c is the probability that if x occurs, or alone fails, the former of the two

alternatives is the one that will happen. The limits of the solution are

evidently 0 and p.

This solution appears to give us no information beyond what unassisted

good sense would have conveyed. It is, however, all that the single datum

here assumed really warrants us in inferring. We shall in the next solution see

how an addition to our data restricts within narrower limits the final solution.

  SOLUTION OF THE SECOND CASE.


    Here we assume as our data the equations 

              Prob. [x + (1 - a;) yz] = p, 


                 Prob. {y + (1 -y) xz) = q. 

    Let us write 


x + (1 - x) yz = *,

y + (l-y)xz = t;

from the first of which we have, by (VIII. 7),

. . {»+(l -x)yz] (1 -») + * {1 -x- (1 -x)yz) = 0,

or (x + xyz) 1 + sx (1 - yz) = 0;

provided that for simplicity we write x for I - x, y for 1 - y, and

so on. Now, writing for 1 - yz its value in constituents, we

have

(x + xyz) 1 + sx {yz + yz + yz) = 0,an equation consisting solely of positive terms.









































In like manner we have from the second equation,
(y+§az) i+ tj (x5 + F2+ £2) = 03

and from the sum of these two equations we are to eliminate y
and z.

Ifin that sum we make y = 1, 2 =1, we get the result ¥ + 7.
Ifin tho same sum we make y= 1, z=0, we get the result

25+ E+ 1L
If in the same sum we make y =0, 2 = 1, we get
a5+ 5+ ab + 17,
Andif, lastly, in the same sum we make y = 0, z= 0, we find
T4+ ST 4T+ LT, OF TF 4+ SF 4+ 4

These four expressions are to be multiplied together. Now
the first and third may be multiplied in the following manner :

(3+7) @F+5T+at +17)
=25 +at + (7+1) (s + £z) by (IX. Prop. 11.)
=3+ @t + TF+ sFL ()
Again, the second and fourth give by (IX. Prop. 1.)
(35 +57 +1) (5 +55+1)
=37 + oF. 3)
Lastly, (2) and (3) multiplied together give
(a3 + 57) (a7 + s3E + ot +173)
=45 + 57 (st + at + £75)
=17 + sFL.

‘Whence the final equation is

 

which, solved with reference to z, gives

(-0
TS
o

dst 4t (1-) 4 0(1-5)t+0(1=5) (1-1),

 
and, proceeding with this according to the rule, we have, finally,

Prob. x = p (1 - q) + cpq. (4)where c is the probability that if the event st happen, x will happen. Now if

we form the developed expression of st by multiplying the expressions for *

and t together, we find—

c = Prob. that if x and y happen together, or x and z happen together, and y

fail, or y and z happen together, and x fail, the event x will happen.

The limits of Prob. x are evidently p (1 - q) and p.

This solution is more definite than the former one, inasmuch as it contains

a term unaffected by an arbitrary constant.

  SOLUTION OF THE THIRD CASE.

Here the data are—

Prob. {x + (1 - x)yz) = p,

Prob. {y + (1 - y) xz) = q,

Prob. {z + (1 - z) xy] = r.

Let us, as before, write x for 1 - x, &c., and assume


    x + xyz - s, 

    y + yxz= t, 


z + zxy = u.

On reduction by (VIII. 8) we obtain the equation

(x + xyz)s + sx (yz + yz + yz)

+ (y + yxz) t+ ty (zx + xz + xz)

+ (z + zxy) u+ uz (xy + xy + xy) = 0. (5)

Now instead of directly eliminating y and z from the above equation, let us, in

accordance with (IX. Prop, in.), assume the result of that elimination to be

Ex + E(l -x) = 0,

then E will be found by making in the given equation f>l, and eliminating y

and z from the resulting equation, and E' will be found by making in the

given equation x = 0, and eliminating y and z from the result. First, then,

making x = 1, we have 

T+ GE+(z+yD) A+ ugE=0,

and making in the first member of this equation successively
y=1,z=1, y=1, 2= 0, &, and multiplying together the
results, we have the expression

Get+a) Gri+a)G+e+d) (F+t+u),
which is equivalent to

G+i+a)G+e+u).
This is the expression for . We shall retain it in its present
form. It has already been shown by example (VIIL 3), that
the actual reduction of such expressions by multiplication, though
convenient, is not necessary.
Again in (5), making z = 0, we have
YT s(E+ G+ G A Y+ iz AU = 03

from which, by the same process of elimination, we find for E the
expression

Grtra)(s+tvu)(s+t+d) (st t+u)
The final result of the elimination of y and z from (5) is there-
fore
(5+T+i)(F+t+ w)z+(3+i+a) (s+E+u)(s+2+@) (s 42+ u) (1-2) =0,
Whence we have

 

FHE+d) (orbru) (srtad) (srtin)

PTG G e @14 8) (st (a4 4R (FrErR)

or, developing the sccond member,

 

 

z

1o 1. o
. = gt ot + g i+ st ©

  

+;:e-+oz[u+n:mn;

Hence, passing from Logic to Algebra,
stus st _ stu +5ta _ stu + S

P 7 ’ (U]

e s

 

 

 

 
P, atii + cstu
rob.z = POt
stu+ st + 30U + 30 + 518

 

®)
                                                                                        s t

To simplify this system of equations, change — into s, - into t,                                                                                        * t

&c., and after the change let X stand for stu + s +1 + 1. We then

have

                                                                            „ . * + cstu ,.
                                                                                          n

                                                                    Prob. x = —-—, (9)
































with the relations
stuts stutt stutu

P ¥
From theso equations we got

 

 

 

=stuts+trutl=X (10)

stus s =2p, 1)
stuts=A-t-u-1,
codp=A-u-tol,

wit=X(1-p)-1.
Similarly, wrs=A(l-g)-1,
and set=d(1-7) -1

From which equations we find

 

Now, by (10),

stu=)p-s

Substitute in this equation the values of 5, £, and u sbove deter-
‘mined, and we have

{@+p-g-n)A-1){(L+g-p-r)A-1}{(L+r-p-g)A-11
—4((prger-DA+l], (13)
an equation which determines A. The values of 5, ¢, and u, are

then given by (12), and their substitution in (9) completes the
solution of the problem.
10. Now a difficulty, the bringing of which prominently before the reader

has been one object of this investigation, here arises. How shall it be

determined, which root of the above equation ought to taken for the value of

X. To this difficulty some reference was made in the opening of the presentchapter, and it was intimated that its fuller consideration was reserved for the

next one; from which the following results are taken.

In order that the data of the problem may be derived from a possible

experience, the quantities p, q, and r must be subject to the following

conditions:

1 +p-q->0,
          r

l+q-p-r^0, (14)

l+r-p-q>0.

Moreover, the value of X to be employed in the general solution must satisfy

the following conditions:

X>. , X5. , \>- . (15)

                            x
l+p-q-r l+q-p-r'' l+r-p-q 

Now these two sets of conditions suffice for the limitation of the general

solution. It may be shown, that the central equation (13) furnishes but one

value of X, which does satisfy these conditions, and that value of X is the one

required.

Let 1 + p - q - r be the least of the three coefficients of X

given above, then - will be the greatest of those values, above which we are

to show that there exists but one value ofX. Let us write (13) in the form

  {(l+p-q-r)\-l}{(l + q-p-r)\-l){(l + r-p-q)\-l}

  -4{(p +  + r-l)X + l) = 0; (16)
          ?

and represent the first member by V.

  Assume X = -, , then V becomes

1 + p - q - r

  \l+p-q-r J \l+p-q-rj

which is negative.


    Let X = oo, then V is positive and infinite. 

    Again, ?£-(l+p-q-r)(l + q-p-r){(l + r-p-q)\-l)

                                                              + similar positive terms,

which expression is positive between the limits X =

and X = QD.

If then we construct a curve whose abscissa shall be measured by X, and

whose ordinates by V, that curve will, between the limits specified, pass from

below to above the abscissa X, its convexity always being downwards. Hence

it will but once intersect the abscissaX within those limits; and the equation

(16) will, therefore, have but one root thereto corresponding.

The solution is, therefore, expressed by (9), X being that root of (13) which

satisfies the conditions (15), and «, t, and u being given by (12). The

interpretation of c may be deduced in the usual way.

It appears from the above, that the problem is, in all cases, more or less

indeterminate.  CHAPTER XIX.

OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS.

1. T) Y the term statistical conditions, I mean those conditions -*-* which

must connect the numerical data of a problem in order that those data may be

consistent with each other, and therefore such as statistical observations

might actually have furnished. The determination of such conditions

constitutes an important problem, the solution of which, to an extent

sufficient at least for the requirements of this work, I purpose to undertake in

the present chapter, regarding it partly as an independent object of

speculation, but partly also as a necessary supplement to the theory of

probabilities already in some degree exemplified. The nature of the

connexion between the two subjects may be stated as follows:

2. There are innumerable instances, and one of the kind presented itself in

the last chapter, EX. 7, in which the solution of a question in the theory of

probabilities is finally dependent upon the solution of an algebraic equation

of an elevated degree. In such cases the selection of the proper root must be

determined by certain conditions, partly relating to the numerical values

assigned in the data, partly to the due limitation of the element required. The

discovery of such conditions may sometimes be effected by unaided

reasoning. For instance, if there is a probability p of the occurrence of an

event A, and a probability q of the concurrence of the said event A, and

another event B, it is evident that we must have

    a
  P>But for the general determination of such relations, a distinct method is

required, and this we proceed to establish.

As derived from actual experience, the probability of any event is the residt

of a process of approximation. It is the limit of the ratio of the number of

cases in which the event is observed to occur, to the whole number of equally

possible cases which observation records,—a limit to which we approach the

more iKtirly as the number of observations is increased. Now let the avinbol

w, prefixed to the expression of any class, represent the number of

individuals contained in that class. Thus, x representing men, and y white

beings, let us assume

MX = number of men.

uxy = number of white men.»x (1 - y) = number of men who are not white; and so on.

In accordance with this notation »(l) will represent the number

of individuals contained in the universe of discourse, and ;,{

will represent the probability that any individual being, selected out of that

universe of being denoted by n (1), is a man. If observation has not made us

acquainted with the total values of n(x) and »(l), then the probability in

question is the limit to

71 (x\

which approaches as the number of individual observations

is increased.

In like manner if, as will generally be supposed in this chapter, x represent

an event of a particular kind observed, n (x) will represent the number of

occurrences of that event, n (1) the number of observed events (equally

probable) of all kinds, and

—jr\, or its limit, the probability of the occurrence of the

event x.

  Hence it is clear that any conclusions which may be deduced respecting the

ratios of the quantities n (x), n (y), n (1), &c. may be converted into

conclusions respecting the probabilities of the events represented by x, y, &c.

Thus, if we should find such a relation as the following, viz.,

n(x) + n(y)<n(l), expressing that the number of times in which the event x

occurs and the number of times in which the event y occurs, are together less

than the number of possible occurrences n (1), we might thence deduce the

relation,

n(x) n(y)

«(1) «(1)' or Prob. x + Prob. y < 1.A nd generally any such statistical

relations as the above will be converted into relations connecting the

probabilities of the events concerned, by changing n(l) into 1, and any other

symbol n(x) into Prob. x.

3. First, then, we shall investigate a method of determining the numerical

relations of classes or events, and more particularly the major and minorlimits of numerical value. Secondly, we shall apply the method to the

limitation of the solutions of questions in the theory of probabilities.

It is evident that the symbol n is distributive in its operation. Thus we have


    n{xy+ (1-*) (1-y)) =nxy + n(l-x)(l-y) 

           nx (1 - y) = nx - nxy, 


and so on. The number of things contained in any class resolvable into

distinct groups or portions is equal to the sum of the numbers of things found

in those separate portions. It is evident, further, that any expression formed of

the logical symbols x, y, &c. may be developed or expanded in any way

consistent with the laws of the symbols, and the symbol n applied to each

term of the result, provided that any constant multiplier which may appear, be

placed outside the symbol n; without affecting the value of the result. The

expression n (1), should it appear, will of course represent the number of

individuals contained in the universe. Thus,


    n (\ - x) (\ - y) = n(l - x - y + xy) 

    n(1) - n(x) - n(y) + n {xy). 


    Again, n {xy + (1 - x) (1 - y)} = n(l - x - y + 2xy) 

                = n (1) - nx - ny + 2nxy). 


In the last member the term Inxy indicates twice the number of individuals

contained in the class xy.

4. We proceed now to investigate the numerical limits of classes whose

logical expression is given. In this inquiry the following principles are of

fundamental importance:

1st. If all the members of a given class possess a certain property x, the

total number of individuals contained in the class x will be a superior limit of

the number of individuals contained in the given class.

2nd. A minor limit of the number of individuals in any class y will be

found by subtracting a major numerical limit of the contrary class, 1 - y, from

the number of individuals contained in the universe.

To exemplify these principles, let us apply them to the following problem:    PROBLEM.—Given, n (1), n (x), and n (y), required the superior and inferior

limits of nxy.

Here our data are the number of individuals contained in the universe of

discourse, the number contained in the class x, and the number in the class y,

and it is required to determine the limits of the number contained in the class

composed of the individuals that are found at once in the class x and in the

class y.

By Principle I. this number cannot exceed the number contained in the

class x, nor can it exceed the number contained in the class y. Its major limit

will then be the least of the two values n (x) and (ij).

By Principle iI. a minor limit of the class xy will be given by the

expression

n(l)-major limit of {a;(l -y) + y(l -x) + (1 - x) (l-y)),(l)

since x (1 - y) + y (1 - x) + (1 - x) (1 - y) is the complement of the class xy, i.

e. what it wants to make up the universe.

Now x(l - y) + (1 - a:) (1 - y) = 1 - y. We have therefore for (1),

n (I) - major limit of {1 - y + y (1 - x)} = n(l) - n(l -y) - major limit of y (1 - x).

(2)

The major limit of »/(l - x) is the least of the two values «(y) and n (1 - a;).

Let n (y) be the least, then (2) becomes

n(l)-n(l-y)-n(y) = n(l) - n(1) + n(y) - m(y) = 0. Secondly, let n (1 - x) be less

than n (//), then major limit of ny (1 - x) = n (1 - x); therefore (2) becomes

n (1) - n (1 - y) - n (1 - x)

= n(l) - »(1) + n(y) - »(1) + n(x)

= nx + ny -n (1).

The minor limit of nxy is therefore either 0 or n (x) + n (y) - »(l), according as

n (y) is less or greater than n (1 - x), or, which is an equivalent condition,

according as n (x) is greater or less than n(l-y).

Now as 0 is necessarily a minor limit of the numerical value of any class, it

is sufficient to take account of the second of the above expressions for the

minor limit of n (xy). We have, therefore,  Major limit of n (xy) - least of values n (x) and n (y).

  Minor limit of n (xy) = n (x) + n(y) - n (1).*

  PROPOSITION I.

5. To express the major and minor limits of a class represented by any

constituent of the symbols x, y, z, Sfc., having given the values ofn (x), n (y), n

(z), SfC, and n (1).

  Consider first the constituent xyz.

It is evident that the major numerical limit will be the least of the values

n(x), n(y), n(z).

The minor numerical limit may be deduced as in the previous problem, but

it may also be deduced from the solution of that problem. Thus:

  Minor limit of n(xyz) = n (xy) + n(z) -n(l). (1)

Now this means that n (xyz) is at least as great as the expression n(xy) + n(z) -

»(1). But n(xy) is at least as great as » (x) + n (y) - n (1). Therefore n (xyz) is

at least as great as

n (x) + n (y) - n (1) + n (z) - n (1), or n (x) + n (y) + n (z) - In (1).

      * The above expression for the minor limit of nxy is applied by

    Professor De Morgan, by whom it appears to have been first given, to

    the syllogistic form: Most men in a certain company have coats. Most

    men in the same company have waistcoats. Therefore some in the

    company have coats and waistcoats.

Hence we have

  Minor limit of n(xyz) = n(x) + «(y) + n(z) - 2n(1).

By extending this mode of reasoning we shall arrive at the following

conclusions:

1st. The major numerical limit of the class represented by any constituent

will be found by prefixing n separately to each factor of the constituent, and

taking the least of the resulting values.

2nd. The minor limit will be found by adding all the values above

mentioned together, and subtracting from the result as many, less one, timesthe value of «(1).

  Thus we should have

Major limit of nxy (1 - z) = least of the values nx, ny, and n (1 - z). Minor

limit of nxy{l - z) - n (x) + n (y) + n (1 - z) - 2a(l)

                                                              = nx + n (y) - n (z) - n(l).

In the use of general symbols it is perhaps better to regard all the values

n(x), n(y), n(l - z), as major limits of n {xy(l -z)}, since, in fact, it cannot

exceed any of them. I shall in the following investigations adopt this mode of

expression.

  PROPOSITION II.

6. To determine the major numerical limit of a class expressed by a series

of constituents of the symbols x, y, z, Sfc, the values of n(x), n(y), n(z), #•<:.,

andn(l), being given.

  Evidently one mode of determining such a limit would be to form the least

possible sum of the major limits of the several constituents. Thus a major

limit of the expression

n{xy+(l-x)(l-y)}

would be found by adding the least of the two values nx, ny, furnished by the

first constituent, to the least of the two values n (1 - x), n (1 - y), furnished by

the second constituent. If we do not know which is in each case the least

value, we must form the four possible sums, and reject any of these which are

equal to or exceed n (1). Thus in the above example we should have


    nx + M(1 -X) =n(l). 

    n(x) + n (1 - y) = n (1) + n (x) - n (y). 

    n(y) + re(l -y) = n(1) +w(y) - n(ar). 

    re(y) + n(l -y) = n(l). 


    Rejecting the first and last of the above values, we have 

       n (1) + n(ar)- n (y), and n (1) + n (y) - n (ar), 

    for the expressions required, one of which will (unless nx = My) 

    be less than w(l), and the other greater. The least must of 

    course be taken.   When two or more of the constituents possess a common factor, as x, that

factor can only, as is obvious from Principle I., furnish a single term n (x) in

the final expression of the major limit. Thus if n (ar) appear as a major limit

in two or more constituents, we must, in adding those limits together, replace

nx + nx by nx, and so on. Take, for example, the expression n {xy + ar(l - y)z).

The major limits of this expression, immediately furnished by addition,

would be—

1. nx. 4. ny + nx.

2. nx + n (1 - y). 5. ny + n (1 - y).

3. nx + n (z). 6. ny + nz.

Of these the first and sixth only need be retained; the second, third, and

fourth being greater than the first; and the fifth being equal to n (1). The

limits are therefore

n (x) and n(y) + n (z), and of these two values the last, supposing it to be less

than n (1), must be taken.

  These considerations lead us to the following Rule: RULE.— Take one factor

from each constituent, and prefix to it the symbol n, add the several terms or

results thus formed together, rejecting all repetitions of the same term; the

sum thus obtained will be a major limit of the expression, and the least of all

such sums trill be the major limit to be employed. Thus the major limits of the

expression

xyz + *(1 -y) (1 - z) + (1 - x) (1 -y) (1 - z) would be

the application of the rule, no two minor limits of distinct terms can be added

together, for either those terms will involve some common constituent, in

which case it is clear that we cannot add their minor limits together,—or the

minor limits of the two will not be both positive, in which case the addition

would be useless.

  PROPOSITION IV.

9. Given the respective numbers of individuals comprised in any classes, s,

t, Sfc. logically defined, to deduce a system of numerical limits of any other

class w, also logically defined.

As this is the most general problem which it is meant to discuss in thepresent chapter, the previous inquiries being merely introductory to it, and the

succeeding ones occupied with its application, it is desirable to state clearly

its nature and design.

  When the classes s,t..w are said to be logically denned, it is meant that they

are classes so defined as to enable us to write down their symbolical

expressions, whether the classes in question be simple or compound. By the

general method of this treatise, the symbol w can then be determined directly

as a developed function of the symbols s, t, &c. in the form

0 1 w = A + 0B + -C+-D, (1)

wherein A,B,C, and D are formed of the constituents of*, t, &a. How from

such an expression the numerical limits of w may in the most general manner

be determined, will be considered hereafter. At present we merely purpose to

show how far this object can be accomplished on the principles developed in

the previous propositions; such an inquiry being sufficient for the purposes of

this work. For simplicity, I shall found my argument upon the particular

development,

■ -«< + a>(i-o + g(i-«)< + jj(i-f)(i-4i (2)

in which all the varieties of coefficients present themselves.

Of the constituent (I -s) (I - t), which has for its coefficient -, it is implied

that some, none, or all of the class denoted by that constituent are found in w.

It is evident that n(w) will have its highest numerical value when all the

members of the class denoted by (1 -*) (1 -f) are found in w. Moreover, as

none of the individuals contained in the classes denoted by * (1 -t) and (1 - s)

t are found in w, the superior numerical limits of w will be identical with

those of the class st + (1 - s) (1 - t). They are, therefore,

ns + n (1 - t) and nt + n (1 - s).

In like manner a system of superior numerical limits of the

development A + OB + - C + -z D, may be found from those of

A + Cby Prop. 2.

  Again, any minor numerical limit of w will, by Principle n., be given by

the expression

n(l) - major limit of n (1 - w),but the development of w being given by (1), that of 1 - w; will obviously be

l-w-OA + B + ^C + Jl>.

This may be directly proved by the method of Prop. 2, Chap. X. Hence

. Minor limit of n(w) = n(1) - major limit (B + C)

                            = minor limit of (.A + D),

by Principle n., since the classes A + D and B + C are supplementary. Thus

the minor limit of the second member of (2) would be n (t), and, generalizing

this mode of reasoning, we have the following result:


    A system of minor limits of the development 

          A + 05 + jj C + ^D 


will be given by the minor limits of A + D.

This result may also be directly inferred. For of minor numerical limits we

are bound to seek the greatest. Now we obtain in general a higher minor limit

by connecting the class D

x

with A in the expression of w, a combination which, as shown in various

examples of the Logic we are permitted to make, than we otherwise should

obtain.

  Finally, as the concluding term of the development of w indicates the

equation D = 0, it is evident that n (D) = 0. Hence

we have

  Minor limit of n (D) < 0,

and this equation, treated by Prop. 3, gives the requisite conditions among the

numerical elements n(s), n(t), &c., in order that the problem may be real, and

may embody in its data the results of a possible experience.

  Thus from the term - (1 - s)t in the second member of (2)

wo should deduce

n(l -s) + n(t) - »(l) <0,.-. n(t) < n(s).

  These conclusions may be embodied in the following rule:

10. RULE.—Determine the expression of the class to as a developed logical

function of the symbols s, t, Sj-c. in the form

Then will

Maj. lim. w = Maj. lim. A + C.

  Min. lim. w = Min. lim. A + D. The necessary numerical conditions among

the data being given by

the inequality

  Min. lim. D <n(l).

To apply the above method to the limitation of the solutions of questions in

probabilities, it is only necessary to replace in each of the formule n (x) by

Prob. x, n (j/) by Prob. y, &c., and, finally, n (1) by 1. The application being,

however, of great importance, it may be desirable to exhibit in the form of a

rule the chief results of transformation.

11. Given the probabilities of any events s, t, &c, whereof another event w

is a developed logical function, in the form

w = A + 0B+^C+^D,

required the systems of superior and inferior limits of Prob. w, and the

conditions among the data.

    SOLUTION.—The superior limits of Prob. (A + C), and the inferior limits of

Prob. (A + D) will form two such systems as are sought. The conditions

among the constants in the data will be given by the inequality,

Inf. lim. Prob. Z) 5 0.

In the application of these principles we have always Inf. lim. Prob. xi x..
                                                                                      t

x = Prob. x + Prob. a^.. + Prob. x - (n - 1).
nln

Moreover, the inferior limits can only be determined from single terms, either

given or formed by aggregation. Superior limits are included in the form 2

Prob. x, Prob. x applying only to symbols which are different, and are taken

from different terms in the expression whose superior limit is sought. Thusthe superior limits of Prob. xyz + x (1 - y) (1 - z) are

  Prob.x, Prob.y + Prob. (1 - z), and Prob. z + Prob. (1 -y).

Let it be observed, that if in the last case we had taken Prob. z from the first

term, and Prob. (1 - z) from the second,—a connexion not forbidden,—we

should have had as their sum 1, which as a result would be useless because a

priori necessary. It is obvious that we may reject any limits which do not fall

between 0 and 1.

Let us apply this method to EX. 7, Case in. of the last chapter.

The final logical solution is

0 1-1


    x = - stu + - stu + - stu + stu 

    0 0 0 


+ -ltu+ Qstu+ Oltu + Oltii,

the data being

Prob. s = p, Prob. t = q, Prob. u = r.

We shall seek both the numerical limits of x, and the conditions connecting

p, q, and r.

The superior limits of x are, according to the rule, given by those of stu +

stu. They are, therefore,

p, q + 1 - r, r + 1 - q. The inferior limit of x are given by those of stu + stu +

siu + Itu. We may collect the first and third of these constituents in the single

term st, and the second and third in the single term si. The inferior limits of x

must then be deduced separately from the terms s (1 - t), s (1 - w), (I - s)tu,

which give

p + I - q - I, p+l-r-l, l-p + q + r-2, or p - q, p - r, and q + r -p - 1.

  Finally, the conditions among the constants p, q, and r, are given by the

terms

stu, stu, stu,

from which, by the rule, we deducep+l-q+r-2<0, p + q+l-r-2<0, 1-p+q + r-2<0.

or 1 + q-p-r>0, I +r-p-q>0, 1 + p-q -r>0.

These are the limiting conditions employed in the analysis of the final

solution. The conditions by which in that solution X is limited, were

determined, however, simply from the conditions that the quantities *, t, and

u should be positive. Narrower limits of that quantity might, in all

probability, have been deduced from the above investigation.

12. The following application is taken from an important problem, the

solution of which will be given in the next chapter. There are given,

Prob. x = ci , Prob. y = c, Prob. s=c, p„ Prob. t = cp., together with the
                              2t

logical equation

2 = stay + sixy + st xy + Olt ICstxy + stxy + stxy + s'txy + sixy "L + *txy +

Itxy + stxy + stxy;

and it is required to determine the conditions among the constants en c, pi, p,
                                                                                  22

and the major and minor limits of z.

First let us seek the conditions among the constants. Confining our

attention to the terms whose coefficients are-, we

readily form, by the aggregation of constituents, the following terms, viz.:

s(l-x), t(\-y), sq(l-t), to(l-*)5

nor can we form any other terms which are not included under these. Hence

the conditions among the constants are,


    n(*) + n(l-a;)-n(l)<0, 

    n (0 + n (1 - y) - n (1) < 0, 

    ri(s) + n (y) + n(l-t)-2n (1) < 0, 

    n (<) + n (x) + n (1 - s) - 2n (1) < 0. 


Now replace n (x) by c, n (y) by c, n (s) by cu n (t) by dpt, and w(l) by 1,
                                          2lP

and we have, after slight reductions,

CiPi < c,, c/> < c,
              222

                        c,
ciPl < 1 - C, (1 - />), P, 5 1 - C, (1 - Pi).
                    2Such are, then, the requisite conditions among the constants.

  Again, the major limits of z are identical with those of the expression

stxy + s (1 - t) x (1 - y) + (1 - *) t (1 - x) y;

which, if we bear in mind the conditions

n(s)<n(x), n(0<n(y)2 above determined, will be found to be

n(s) + n (t), or, dpi + c,p2,

n (s) + n (1 - x), or, 1 - c, (1 - p,)

                  lc
n (0 + n 0 - #), 2  ~ , ( - #>)•

  Lastly, to ascertain the minor limits of z, we readily form

from the constituents, whose coefficients are 1 or -, the single

terms * and t, nor ran any other terms not included under these be formed by

selection or aggregation. Hence, for the minor limit* of z we have the values

cp and c»p.
xx2

13. It is to be observed, that the method developed above does not always

assign the narrowest limits which it is possible to determine. But it in all

cases, I believe, sufficiently limits the solutions of questions in the theory of

probabilities.

The problem of the determination of the narrowest limits of numerical

extension of a class is, however, always reducible to a purely algebraical

form.* Thus, resuming the equations

w~A + 0B + ~C + ^D,

let the highest inferior numerical limit of w be represented by the formula an

(*) + bn(t) . . + dn(V), wherein a,b,c,..d are numerical constants to be

determined, and s, t, &c., the logical symbols of which A, B, C, D are

constituents. Then

an (s) + bn(t) . . + dn(l) = minor limit of A subject

to the condition D = 0. Hence if we develop the function

as + bt. . + d,

reject from the result all constituents which are found in D, the coefficients ofthose constituents which remain, and are found also in A, ought not

individually to exceed unity in value, and the coefficients of those

constituents which remain, and which are not found in A, should individually

not exceed 0 in value. Hence we shall have a series of inequalities of the

formy< 1, and another series of the form g < 0, y'and g being linear functions

of a, b, c, &c. Then those values of a, b . . d, which, while satisfying the

above conditions, give to the function

an (s) + bn(t) . . + dn (1),

its highest value must be determined, and the highest value in

• The author regrets the loss of a manuscript, written about four years ago,

in which this method, he believes, was developed at considerable length. His

recollection of the contents is almost entirely confined to the impression that

the principle of the method was the same as above described, and that its

sufficiency was proved. The prior methods of this chapter are, it is almost

needless to say, easier, though certainly less general.

question will be the highest minor limit of w. To the above we may add the

relations similarly formed for the determination of the relations among the

given constants n (s), n(t) . .n (1).

14. The following somewhat complicated example will show how the

limitation of a solution is effected, when the problem involves an arbitrary

element, constituting it the representative of a system of problems agreeing in

their data, but unlimited in their quesita.

  PROBLEM.—Of n events z^,.. x, the following particulars are known:
                                n

1st. The probability that either the event x will occur, or all the events fail,
                                                  x

is p.
  Y

2nd. The probability that either the event x will occur, or all the events
                                                    2

fail, is p. And so on for the others.
        2

It is required to find the probability of any single event, or combination of

events, represented by the general functional form rj, (.r, . . xn), or ip.

  Adopting a previous notation, the data of the problem are

Prob. (a;, + Xi .. x») - pi . . Prob. (x + Xi.. xn) = p.
                                          nn    And Prob. <j, (x . . x) is required. 
                        {n

   Assume generally 


Xr + X\ . . X ~ *r» (.!_)
                n

0 = w>. (2)

We hence obtain the collective logical equation of the problem

2{(x + Xi . . xn) s + s (x - i .. x„)) + <pw + wlj, = 0. (3)
      rrrri

From this equation we must eliminate the symbols xx,..x, and determine w as
                                                                  n

a developed logical function of *i. . *„.

Let us represent the result of the aforesaid elimination in the form

then will E be the result of the elimination of the same symbols from the

equation

2 [(x + ii.. x) s + s (x - ^ . . xn)} +1-^ = 0. (4)
      rnrrr

Now E will be the product of the coefficients of all the constituents

(considered with reference to the symbols a;,, x . . xn) which are found in the
                                                      2

development of the first member of the above equation. Moreover, <p, and

therefore 1 - <p, will consist of a series of such constituents, having unity for

their respective coefficients. In determining the forms of the coefficients in

the development of the first member of (4), it will be convenient to arrange

them in the following manner:

1st. The coefficients of constituents found in 1 - <p.

2nd. The coefficient of x x,. . x„, if found in 0.
                              lt

3rd. The coefficients of constituents found in 0, excluding the constituent

x,, x, . . x.
        n

The above is manifestly an exhaustive classification.

First then; the coefficient of any constituent found in 1 - £, will, in the

development of the first member of (4), be of the form

1 + positive terms derived from 2.

Hence, every such coefficient may be replaced by unity, Prop. I. Chap. iX.  Secondly; the coefficient of x, . . x, if found in 0, in the development of the
                                          n

first member of (4) will be

2*, or Si + 72 . . + l
    r„

  Thirdly; the coefficient of any other constituent, x, . . x,, #1tl • - x, found
                                                                                a

in <p, in the development of the first member of (4) will be *, . . + *; + s .. +
                                                                                    itl

*„.

Now it is seen, that E is the product of all the coefficients above

determined; but as the coefficients of those constituents which are not found

in ^ reduce to unity, E may be regarded as the product of the coefficients of

those constituents which are found in <p. From the mode in which those

coefficients arc formed, we derive the following rule for the determination of

E, viz., in each constituent found in <p, except the constituent x\ x,. . x., for

X, write Si, for x, write *i, and so on, and add the results; but for the

constituent x,, x.. x„, if it occur in <p, write 7i + s.. + s; the product of all
                  22H

these sums is E.

To find E' wc must in (3) make w = 0, and eliminate x, x.. x„ from the
                                                                  t2

reduced equation. That equation will be

S[(x + xi.. + x„) «+ *(xr-x,.. x„)J +^ = 0. (5)
      rrr

  Hence E will be formed from the constituents in 1 - <p, i. e. from the

constituents not found in <p m the same way as E is formed from the

constituents found in ^.

  Consider next the equation

Ew + E(l-w) = 0. This gives

W6)
 = E^E' <

  NowE and E'are functions of the symbols s s . . s. The expansion of the
                                                      2,2n

value of w will, therefore, consist of all the constituents which can be formed

out of those symbols, with their proper coefficients annexed to them, as

determined by the rule of development.

  Moreover, E and E are each formed by the multiplication of factors, and

neither of them can vanish unless some one of the factors of which it is

composed vanishes. Again, any factor, as Si.. + s can only vanish when all
                                                        nthe terms by the addition of which it is formed vanish together, since in

development we attribute to these terms the values 0 and 1, only. It is further

evident, that no two factors differing from each other can vanish together.

Thus the factors 7i + 7.. + 1„, and *i + 7 . . + *n, cannot simultaneously
                        22

vanish, for the former cannot vanish unless Si = 0, or Si - 1; but the latter

cannot vanish unless «, = 0.

First, let us determine the coefficient of the constituent *x«.. s in the
                                                                        2n

development of the value of to.

The simultaneous assumption 5i = 1, S, = 1 . . s - 1, would
                                                          n

cause the factor *x + s . . + s„ to vanish if this should occur in
                        i

E or E; and no other factor under the same assumption woidd

vanish; but Si + s . . + s does not occur as a factor of either
                  2n

E or E'; neither of these quantities, therefore, can vanish; and,

E . 0

therefore, the expression -=;—=, is neither 1, 0, nor -.

sL - £J 0

  Wherefore the coefficient ofl^ s . . I„ in the expanded value ofw, may be
                                      2

represented by - .

  Secondly, let us determine the coefficient of the constituent The

assumptions «, = I, *, ■ 1,.. «„ = 1, would cause the factor

si + *2. . + * to vanish. Now this factor is found in E and not
              n

in E whenever <j, contains both the constituents xx x,. . x» and

E' E

x x , . x. Here then -=—= becomes -TM or 1. The factor
x2n

Mi — Hi JU

*i + 7 . . + *» is found in E' and not in E, if ^ contains neither
    ,

of the constituents JC, x . . x and x x . . x„. Here then
                        2nx2E 0 _

-=r =, becomes —= or 0. Lastly, the factor s +*,.. + *„ b
                                                  x

E — E —E

contained in both E and E', if one of the constituents z,z,.. x»

E' and x,x. . x is found in A, and one is not. Here then -=;—=
            ,n

                                                                                    E — E

becomes -.

  The coefficient of the constituent sxS . . s„, will there/ore be
                                            2

1,0, or -, according as <p contains both the constituents x, X2.. x
                                                                            n

and x, x2 . . x„, or neither of them, or one of them and not the other.

  Lastly, to determine the coefficient of any other constituent as *i .. Si

~S~ui . .s„.

The assumptions s = 1, . . s = 1, * = 0, s = 0, would cause the factor »i . .
                        iii+xn

+ It + *j.. + s to vanish. Now this factor is found in E, if the constituent x..
        +tnx

Xi ij. . x„ is found in <p and in E', if the said constituent is not found in ^. In
  +'

the

E E former case we have „. - „ = -=- = 1; in the latter case we have

= = 0.

E'-E 0-E

  Hence the coefficient of any other constituent *, ,.s, s^.. *n, is 1 or 0
                                                              t

according as the similar constituent X, . . X{ xj.i . . x is or is not found in
                                                              n

<p.

We may, therefore, practically determine the value of w in the following

manner. Rejecting from the given expression of <j, the constituents x, x . . x„
                                                                                    2

and and xx..x, should both or either of them be contained in it, let the
          xin

symbols x,, x, . . x„, in the result be changed into *,, *,.. *„ respectively. Let
              22

the coefficients of the constituents s, *.. *„ and s^,.. *„ be determined
                                            2

according to the special rules for those cases given above, and let every other

constituent have for its coefficient 0. The result will be the value of w as afunction of * s, .. s.
              M2n

As a particular case, let <p = x. It is required from the given data to
                                      t

determine the probability of the event xt.

The symbol x expanded in terms of the entire series of symbols xi, x„ . .
                l}

x„, will generate all the constituents of those symbols which have a;, as a

factor. Among those constituents will be found the constituent x a:,. . x but
                                                                          ln,

not the constituent

  Hence in the expanded value of x as a function of the symbols s s, .. s„,
                                        tlt2

the constituent «i s.. *„ will have the coefficient
                    2

- , and the constituent 7i s.. s the coefficient -.
                            2n

If from xi we reject the constituent x^ x . . x, the result will be x - xix. . x„,
                                                2nlt

and changing therein xi into s &c., we have *,-*,*,.. s for the corresponding
                                  ltn

portion of the expression' of xi as a function of *i, s, . . s.
                                                            2n

  Hence the final expression for xi is

0 1 __ _

xi°Si- SiS . ,s„ + ~ss..s + -ss..s
          2l2nl2n

+ constituents whose coefficients are 0.

The sum of all the constituents in the above expansion whose

coefficients are either 1,0, or —, will be 1 - s,7 .. s„.
                                                      2

We shall, therefore, have the following algebraic system for the

determination of Prob. x, viz.:
                          l

„ . *i — S\S . . S„ + cSS . . S
                2t2n

Prob. xi = —=-= = , (8)

                                      1 - SiS .. Sn
                                              2

with the relations

Pi ~ K" ~ Pn (9)

= 1 — Si s • • s = A.
              2„It will be seen, that the relations for the determination of *,*,.. s are quite
                                                                            n

independent of the form of the function 0, and the values of these quantities,

determined once, will serve for all possible problems in which the data are

the same, however the qumsita of those problems may vary. The nature of

that event, or combination of events, whose probability is sought, will affect

only the form of the function in which the determined values of *i *,.. s„ are

to be substituted. We have from (9)

  «i=piA, «s=p,X, .. s„=pX.
                              a

Whence

1 _ (l -\) (l-p,\) . . (1 -pX) = X. Or,
        Pin

1 - X = (1 -\) (1 -pX). . (\-pnX); (10)
              Pi2

from which equation the value of X is to be determined.

  Supposing this value determined, the value of Prob. a;, will be

                        n
PiX - (\ - c)pp.. pX 1-(1-/U) (l-X)..{l- PnXy
                i2nPi

or, on reduction by (10),

                                      ni
Prob. a:, = p, - (1 - c) p,p,. .p„X. (11)

Let us next seek the conditions which must be fulfilled among the

constants/),, p,.. /)„, and the limits of the value of Prob. Xi.
              2

As there is but one term with the coefficient -, there is but

one condition among the constants, viz.,

  Minor limit, (1 - *i) (1 - *i) .. (1 - s„) < 0.

Or, n(l -«,) +n(l-*,).. + n(l - s) - (n-l)n(l); 0.
                                n

Or, n (1) - n (*,) - n (.s) .. - n (s) < 0.
                        2n

Whence pi +p . . + p„ > 1,
              i

the condition required.

The major limit of Prob. x is the major limit of the sum of
                                x

those constituents whose coefficients are 1 or--. But that sum is *,.Hence,

  Major limit, Prob.x, = major limit *, = p,.

The minor limit of Prob. xt will be identical with the minor limit of the

expression

*i - *i *2. . *„ + (1 - *i) (1 - s) . . (1 - s„).
                                    2

A little attention will show that the different aggregates, terms which can

be formed out of the above, each including the greatest possible number of

constituents, will be the following, viz.:

  *i(l-*), Si (1 - s), . . *, (1 - s„), (l-«2) (l-«)..(l-s).
        222n

  From these we deduce the following expressions for the minor limit, viz.:

Pi-Pt, Pi-p-. Pi-Pn, 1-p-p. .-p„.
              2t2

The value of Prob. #, will, therefore, not fall short of any of these values,

nor exceed the value ofpi.

  Instead, however, of employing these conditions, we may directly avail

ourselves of the principle stated in the demonstration of the general method

in probabilities. The condition that «M s, .. s„ must each be less than unity,
                                              2

requires that X

should be less than each of the quantities —, —, . . —. And

Pi Pi Pn

the condition that s,, s, . . s„, must each be greater than 0, requires that A
                        2

should also be greater than 0. Now p p . . p being proper fractions satisfying
                                          t2n

the condition

Pi + Pi . • + Pn > 1, it may be shown that but one positive value of X can

be deduced from the central equation (10) which shall be less than each of

the quantities —, —, .. —. That value of X is, therefore, the

Pi P2 Pn

one required.

To prove this, let us consider the equation(1 - pA) (1 - M) .. (1 - ,P„X) - 1 + X = 0.

  When X = 0 the first member vanishes, and the equation is satisfied. Let us

examine the variations of the first member

between the limits X = 0 and X = —, supposing/>, the greatest of

P\ the values pp .. p.
                  {}n

  Representing the first member of the equation by V, we have dV

3£ = -pl(i-p2X) • • (i-PHA).. -(i -\)..(i -/>„.,X)+i,
                            P„Pl

which, when X = 0, assumes the form - p, - p2 . . - p + 1, and is negative in
                                                            n

value. Again, we have

^7= />iP3(l-p,A)(l-p„X) + &c.,

consisting of a series of terms which, under the given restrictions with

reference to the value of A, are positive.

  Lastly, when X - —, we have

%.-.♦'

Pi

which is positive.

  From all this it appears, that if we construct a curve, the ordinates of which

shall represent the value of V corresponding to the abscissa X, that curve will

pass through the origin, and will for small values of X lie beneath the

abscissa. Its convexity will,

between the limits X = 0 and X = — be downwards, and at the

Pi

extreme limit — the curve will be above the abscissa, its ordinate

Pi being positive. It follows from this description, that it will intersect the

abscissa once, and only once, within the limits specified, viz., between the

values X = 0, and X«»—.

Pi The solution of the problem is, therefore, expressed by (11), the value of

X being that root of the equation (10), which lieswithin the limits 0 and —, —,.. —. Pi P* P*

The constant c is obviously the probability, that if the events xi, aj, . . x„,
                                                                                2

all happen, or all fail, they will all happen.

This determination of the value of X suffices for all problems in which the

data are the same as in the one just considered. It is, as from previous

discussions we are prepared to expect, a determination independent of the

form of the function 0.

Let us, as another example, suppose

0 = or w = a:, (1 - x) .. (1 - xn) .. + x (1 - xj.. (1 - *„_,).
                        in

This is equivalent to requiring the probability, that of the events *,, Xi, . . x
                                                                                        n

one, and only one, will happen. The value of w will obviously be

w = «,(l-»,)..(l-fi).. + *„(l-*)..(l-«„.) + -(l-*)..(l-s„), from which we should
                  „xxx

have

Prob. [xx (1 - a;,) .. (1 - x) .. + x (1 -xx) .. (1 -Xn^)}
                              nn


    Si (l-Si) .. (1-«,).. + <»(!-<x).. (1- s„.i) 

              1-(1-«,).. (1_«„) 


  _p\(l-p\).. (l-pX).. + pX(l-pX). - (l-/>».i\)
    iinni

X ~~

,(i-x) g-\) .(i-A)
    fPi

1 -pX l-pX 1 -^„X
      i2

This solution serves well to illustrate the remarks made in the introductory

chapter (1.16) The essential difficulties of the problem are founded in the

nature of its data and not in that of its quesita. The central equation by which

X is determined, and the peculiar discussions connected therewith, are equally

pertinent to every form which that problem can be made to assume, by

varying the interpretation of the arbitrary elements in its original statement.  CHAPTER XX.


      PROBLEMS RELATING TO THE CONNEXION OF CAUSES AND 

                       EFFECTS. 


1 . CO to apprehend in all particular instances the relation of ^ cause and

effect, as to connect the two extremes in thought according to the order in

which they are connected in nature (for the modus operandi is, and must ever

be, unknown to us), is the final object of science. This treatise has shown,

that there is special reference to such an object in the constitution of the

intellectual faculties. There is a sphere of thought which comprehends things

only as coexistent parts of a universe; but there is also a sphere of thought

(Chap. xi.) in which they are apprehended as links of an unbroken, and, to

human appearance, an endless chain—as having their place in an order

connecting them both with that which has gone before, and with that which

shall follow after. In the contemplation of such a series, it is impossible not to

feel the pre-eminence which is due, above all other relations, to the relation

of cause and effect.

Here I propose to consider, in their abstract form, some problems in which

the above relation is involved. There exists among such problems, as might

be anticipated from the nature of the relation with which they are concerned,

a wide diversity. From the probabilities of causes assigned a priori, or given

by experience, and their respective probabilities of association with an effect

contemplated, it may be required to determine the probability of that effect;

and this either, 1st, absolutely, or 2ndly, under given conditions. To such an

object some of the earlier of the following problems relate. On the other

hand, it may be required to determine the probability of a particular cause, or

of some particular connexion among a system of causes, from observed

effects, and the known tendencies of the said causes, singly or in connexion,

to the production of such effects. This class of questions will be considered in

a subsequent portion of the chapter, and other forms of the general inquiry

will also be noticed. I would remark, that although these examples are

designed chiefly as illustrations of a method, no regard has been paid to the

question of ease or convenience in the application of that method. On the

contrary, they have been devised, with whatever success, as types of the class

of problems which might be expected to arise from the study of the relation

of cause and effect in the more complex of its actual and visiblemanifestations.

2. PROBLEM I.—The probabilities of two causes A and A, are Ci and c,
                                                        x

respectively. The probability that if the cause A, present itself, an event E will

accompany it (whether as a consequence of the cause A, or not) is p, and the
                                                                              i

probability that if the cause A present itself, that event E will accompany it,
                                2

whether as a consequence of it or not, isp,. Moreover, the event E cannot

appear in the absence of both the causes A and Ai.* Required the probability
                                                x

of the event E.

The solution of what this problem becomes in the case in

which the causes A, A are mutually exclusive, is well known
                    i2

to be

Prob. E = c, p + dp,;
                  x

and it expresses a particular case of a fundamental and very important

principle in the received theory of probabilities. Here it is proposed to solve

the problem free from the restriction above stated.

      • Tho mode in which such data as the above might be furnished by

    experience is easily conceivable. Opposite the window of the room in

    which I write is a field, liable to be overflowed from two causes,

    distinct, but capable of being combined, viz., floods from the upper

    sources of the River Lee, and tides from the ocean. Suppose that

      observations made on JV separate occasions have yielded the following

    results: On A occasions the river was swollen by freshets, and on P of

    those occasions it was inundated, whether from this cause or not. On B

    occasions the river was swollen by the tide, and on Q of those occasions

    it was inundated, whether from this cause or not. Supposing, then, that

    the field cannot be inundated in the absence of both the causes above

    mentioned, let it be required to determine the total probability of its

    inundation.

        Here the elements a, 6, p, q of the general problem represent the ratios


    A P B Q 

    If' A' y' B'     or rather the values to which those ratios approach, as the value of N is

      indefinitely increased.

                                              Y

Let us represent


    The cause Ax by x. 

    The cause A by y. 
                  i

    The effect E by z. 


  Then we have the following numerical data:

Prob. x = c,, Prob. y = c2,

Prob. a;z = Cip,, Prob. y* = c/j,.
                                    s

  Again, it is provided that if the causes A A are both absent, the effect E
                                                2,i

does not occur; whence we have the logical equation

  (l-*)(l-y) = »(l-z). Or, eliminating v,

                                                                          z(l-x)(l-y)-0. (2)

Now assume,

                                                                        xz = s, yz - t. (3)

Then, reducing these equations (VIII. 7), and connecting the result with (2),

xz(l-s)+ s(l-xz)+yz(l-1)+ t(l-yz)+z(l-x)(l-y)= 0. (4)

  From this equation, z must be determined as a developed logical function

of x, y, s, and t, and its probability thence deduced by means of the data,

Prob. a; = Ci, Prob.y = c, Prob. s = cp, Prob. t = cp. (5)
                            2iiiJ

Now developing(4) with respect to z, and putting x for 1 - x, y for 1 - y, and

so on, we have

(xs + sx + yt + ty + xy) z + (s + t) z = 0,

s+t 

 

ez
stt-a

 

SF-yt-tj -5

-'fzyq-mzy+lxlx_/+ o

 

1 ol 1-
+ asl:tyauz'y4artzy*ﬁu

 

B Momes o Pl
+ g Wy § R 4 Wy + 3T

 

+ 07tzy + 05tz + 05tFy + 05457, (6)
From this result we find (XVIL 17),
V= sty + st + Stzy +
455y + 3
= stay + slaj +3t3y + 5.
Whence, passing from Logic to Algebra, we have the following
system of equations, u standing for the probability sought :
stzy + sixj + Stz _ stay + 5tiy + Sty

a

  

 

stry +3t3y @

aR

L ey elef s Uy otay s ole 4 HEYSTE_
s SR

 

from which we must liminate s, ¢, 7, y, and V.
Now if we have any series of equal fractions, 18

we know that

 
 
la'+ mb' + nd

And thus from the above system of equations we may deduce • Itxy stxy It _ 
                                                                                          V.

U - cipi U - C2p 1 - tt
                    t

whence we have, on equating the product of the three first members to the

cube of the last,

s!>Wxxyy , ^
          =F

(M - Ci/>,) (u - cp) (1 - u)
                      22  Again, from the system (7) we have

six sty stxy y









    

—atap l-U-CtGpr Opr+Cpr -

whence procecding as before

 

RirEyg v @

A e rom-w) (1= +aps—u) (Op 4 Gp-u)

 
                                  2
    Equating the values of V in (8) and (9), we have 

                  („-<:,p,) («-c,p,)(l-a) 

    . {1 -e,(l -p.)-«} {1 -Ci(l -p,)-«} (c,p,+ cp- u), 
                                                      22


which may be more conveniently written in the form

(u-c)(u-c,p)  {l-dO-pQ-u) {l-c,(l-p)-«) ,c,p, + cp - u 1 - u '*
    iPi2=21022

  From this equation the value of u may be found. It remains only to

determine which of the roots must be taken for this purpose.

3. It has been shown (XIX. 12) that the- quantity u, in order that it may

represent the probability required in the above case, must exceed each of the

quantities cpu cp, and fall short of each of the quantities 1 - c, (1 - p,), 1 - c
            i222

(1 - p), and r,p, + cp; the condition among the constants, moreover, being
    222

that the three last quantities must individually exceed each of the two former

ones. Now I shall show that these conditions being satisfied, the final

equation (10) has but one root which falls within the limits assigned. That

root will therefore be the required value of «.

Let us represent the lower limits cp, cp, by a, b respectively, and the
                                          i:22

upper limits 1 -Ci(l - pi), 1 - c2(l - p), and c,pi + cp, by a, b', d respectively.
                                        222

Then the general equation may be expressed in the form

                                                                        2
(K - a) (u-b) (1 - u) - (a'- u) (b' - u) (c- u) - 0, (11) or (l-a'-b')u- {ab-a'V + (\ -

a -b)c) u+ab-a'b'd = 0.

Representing the first member of the above equation by V, we have

                                                                            212
                                                                        aF- o-*-*>- ()

Now let us suppose a the highest of the lower limits of u, a the lowest of itshigher limits, and trace the progress of the values of Vbetween the limits u =

a and u = a.

  When u = a, we see from the form of the first member of (11) that V is

negative, and when u- a we see that V is positive. Between those limits V

varies continuously without becoming infinite, and -T-J- is always of the same

sign.

  Hence if u represent the abscissa V the ordinate of a plane curve, it is

evident that the curve will pass from a point below the axis of u

corresponding to w = a, to a point above the axis of u corresponding to « = a,

the curve remaining continuous, and having its concavity or convexity always

turned in the same direction. A little attention will show that, under these

circumstances, it must cut the axis of u once, and only once.

  Hence between the limits u = a, u = a', there exists one value ofw, and

only one, which satisfies the equation (11). It will further appear, if in

thought the curve be traced, that the other value of u will be less than a when

the quantity 1 - a - V is positive and greater than any one of the quantities a,

V, d when 1 - a' - b' is negative. It hence follows that in the solution of (11)

the positive sign of the radical must be taken. We thus find

ab-a'b'+(l-a'-b')c'+y/ Q .
                          nv

U
 ~ 2(1 -a- b)' W

                                2
where Q= [ab-a'U+(l -a-by}-4(\ -a-b')(ab-a'b'c).

4. The results of this investigation may to some extent be verified. Thus, it

is evident that the probability of the event E must in general exceed the

probability of the concurrence of the event E and the cause A or A Hence we
                                                                      xv

must have, as the solution indicates,

U > cipi, U > C2PZ.

  Again, it is clear that the probability of the effect E must in general be less

than it would be if the causes A» A were mutually exclusive. Hence
                                        2

« < ciPi + cp.
                22

  Lastly, since the probability of the failure of the effect E concurring with

the presence of the cause -4, must, in general, be less than the absolute

probability of the failure of E, we havecM
> 0 ~ Pi) < 1 - ,

.-. u< 1 -c,(l -pi).

Similarly,

M< 1 -c(l -p).
      ,2

And thus the conditions by which the general solution was limited are

confirmed.

  Again, letp = l,p=l. This is to suppose that when either of the causes A„ A
              xi2

is present, the event E will occur. We have then a = c b = c, at' - 1, b' ■ 1, d
                                                              M2

- Ci + c, and substituting in (13) we get
      2

                        72
C C - d - C - 1 + V [(Ci c - c, - C2 - l) + 4 (c, c, - c - c2)) « —
    i2,,i2


    = c, + c - c,Ci on reduction 
            2

    = 1 - (1 - c.) (1 - c,). 


Now this is the known expression for the probability that one cause at least

will be present, which, under the circumstances, is evidently the probability

of the event E.

  Finally, let it be supposed that c and c are very small, so that their product
                                      i2

may be neglected; then the expression for a reduces to cpi + cp. Now the
                                                                xi2

smaller the probability of each cause, the smaller, in a much higher degree, is

the probability of a conjunction of causes. Ultimately, therefore, such

reduction continuing, the probability of the event E becomes the same as if

the causes were mutually exclusive.

I have dwelt at greater length upon this solution, because it serves in some

respect as a model for those which follow, some of which, being of a more

complex character, might, without such preparation, appear difficult.

5. PROBLEM II.—In place of the supposition adopted in the previous problem,

that the event E cannot happen when both the causes A A are absent, let it be
                                                                u2

assumed that the causes A A cannot both be absent, and let the other
                            u2

circumstances remain as before. Required, then, the probability of the event

E.

Here, in place of the equation (2) of the previous solution, we have theequation

  (l-*)(l-y) = 0.

The developed logical expression of z is found to be

                                      1 . 1 _ 1. ,_

2 = stxy + - stxy + - stxy + -stxy

1 _ _ - 1 __ 1 __.

+ -stxy + stxy + -stxy + -stxy

        to++
+ 7T*y +«*^y  ~*t*y  x*t*y

+ OsTxy + dllxy + OlTxy + - sTxy;

and the final solution is

Prob. E = u; the quantity u being determined by the solution of the

equation

(u-a) (u-b) _ (a!-u) (b'-u) ...

a + b - u u-a'-bt + l'

wherein a = cip, b = cp, a = 1 - c, (1 - pi), V - 1 - c, (1 - p).
                l222

The conditions of limitation are the following:—That value of u must be

chosen which exceeds each of the three quantities

a, b, and a + b' - 1,

and which at the same time falls short of each of the three quantities

a', b\ and a + b.

  Exactly as in the solution of the previous problem, it may be shown that

the quadratic equation (1) will have one root, and only one root, satisfying

these conditions. The conditions themselves were deduced by the same rule

as before, excepting that the minor limit a' + b - 1 was found by seeking the

major limit of 1 - z.

It may be added that the constants in the data, beside satisfying the

conditions implied above, viz., that the quantities a', V, and a + b, must

individually exceed a, b, and a + b' - 1, must also satisfy the condition ci +c> 1. This also appears from the application of the rule.
2

6. PROBLEM III.—The probabilities of two events A and B are a and b

respectively, the probability that if the event A take place an event E will

accompany it is p, and the probability thatif the event B take place, the same event £ will accompany
is g. Required the probability that if the event A take place the
event B will take place, or vice versd, the probability that if B
take place, 4 will take place.

Let us represent the eveat 4 by z, the event B by y, and the
ovent E by z. Then the data are—

Prob. z=a, Prob. y=b
Prob.zz=ap, Prob.yz = bg.
Whence it is required to find

Prob.zy  Prob.sy
Prob.z * Prob.y

Let =3 yz=t, =1
Eliminating z, we have, on reduction,

SF+ 4G+ syT+als + 2y + (1 -ay)w =0,

 

_Eatyeayl
% S

£54ay

   

1
1 1
= ayst 4 ayll + gyt g Tt
43 zyu +0zgte L [y:n TGt
3z B e Bora

+ QI+ g 2T+ OFySE + GEGR

+ 2y + 02T + 0y 3T+ 0FGFT. )
Hence, passing from Logic to Algebra,

Prob.zy = ’ﬂ‘ﬁ‘/’_y",

2, # and ¢ being determined by the system of cquations
ayst + 2GsT+ Ty T+ agTi _ayst + Tyit + 2ys i+ TYST
a G
ayst + wsT _ayst + Fyit
T T
= ayst + xGaT+ FyFt + ayT T+ 2gil + FyFT+ EGRT= V.
To reduce the above system to amore convenient form, let every
member be divided by 77 ¥, and in the result let

 

 

 

=
Lo Sem Loa
‘We then find :
ﬂm’#mém’qn:mm'+m'+ml'in'
a b
l_’mmim mm' +m’
@ Ty

sml tmeam e nan 41
Also,
mm + o'
mw e m e an s+ 1

Prob.ay =

“These equations may be reduced to the form
mm'+m mm +m aman own s w

@ T al-p) g
S(mel) @@+ )+ (rl) (e 1) - 1

 

 

 

mm’ + nn'
Prob-ay = Gty T 1) + (ns 1y WFT) =1
Now assume

    

@+ 1) (1) = m‘:—l @+1)(@+1)= ﬁT @
. | (m+1) (m+1)
Then since ' +m = "5 TG

and so on for the other numerators of the system, we find, on
substituting and multiplying cach member of the system by
v+ u~1, the following results :

 

m mu m v
(n+Dap @+ Dby (1) To(i-¢)

Prob.ay = (' + nn) (v + = 1). ®)

   

From the above system we have

P henoe m = —2L.

m+1 w-ap

 
e(-p) L Bog)
a(l-py " Tv=e(i-g)

   

, ntle—r—, &
n-ap v-a(l-py
Substitute these values in (2) reduced to the form

vip-l= » X

 
=Y

C me)(m+1) (a+ 1) (Vyr 1)
and we have

(u=ap) (u=by) _(v-a(-p)} v=b(-9)} @
" v :

Substitute also for m, m, &. their values in (3), and we have
Prob. zy

B0 (OO Pl S 2
(o= = * wmaci-m) wes=pr] ¢+ 4

Ly WP ()
W 5

vip-l=

 

 

Now the first equation of the system (4) gives
Py

vrmslep-aptg s T @

 
vip

 

=L
ap - by + 2,
lep-

(5)
= v - 1 + ap + bq. Similarly,

  >11
  ■(-^->)-U.l.,t(l-),
            M()+f

Adding these equations together, and observing that the first member of the

result becomes identical with the expression just found for Prob. xy, we have


                Prob. xy = v + ft + a+b-2. 

    Let us represent Prob. xy by w, and let a + b - 2 = m, then 


                                                                      H + v = u - m. (6)Again, from (5) we have

ftv = abpq - (ap + bq - 1) ;u. (7) Similarly from the first and third members of

(4) equated we have above formula with the result proper to some known

case. For instance, if it were certain that the event A is always, and the event

B never, associated with the event E, then it is certain that the events A and B

are never conjoined. Hence if p ■ 1, a = 0, we ought to have u - 0. Now the

assumptions p = 1, a = 0, give

pv = ab(l-p)(l -q)- [a(l-p) + b(l-q)- 1) .
                                            v

Let us represent ap + bq - 1 by h, and a (1 - p) + b (1 - q) - 1 by h'. We find

on equating the above values of fiv,by~ Ky =ablpg+(1-p) (1- )}
=ab(p+q-1).
Let ab(p +9-1)=1, then
hu- Ky =1 ®)
Now from (6) and (8) we get
_H@emsl | h(umm)-1

w w

Substitute these values in (7) reduced to the form
n(v+ ) = abpg,
(b= 1) (K (u - m) + 1} = abpgm, )

a quadratic equation, the solution of which determines u, the va-
lue of Prob. ay sought.
The solution may readily be put in the form

i+ (i VL~ i - )} + 4B

and we have

         

k=

 

But if we further observe that
W= h(Km=1) = 1(h+ K) = hiém = (1~ Ry m,
‘=a(l-p)+b(l-9)-1,
whence hek=atb-2=m,
we find
Prob.zy

 

since  h=ap+by-1,

 

W+ h(pm=1) & my/ (1= R + 4hKabpq)}
L AKY + 4hRabpgi. (10
Wl

Tt remains to determine which sign must be given to the radi-
cal. We might nscertain this by the general method exemplificd
in the last problem, but it is far casier, and it fully suffices in the
present instance, to determine the sign by a comparison of the
A = a - 1, A' = 6-l, /=0, m = a + 6-2.

Substituting in (10) we have

and this expression vanishes when the lower sign is taken. Hence the final

solution of the general problem will be expressed in the form

                                                    a
    Prob. xy lh' + h (h'm - [) - m ^/ {(/ - AA') + 4hh'abpq} 
            =_
    Prob.x  2ahh' ' 


    wherein A = ap + bq - 1, A' - a(1 -p) + 6(1 - a) - 1,                      Z = ab (p + a - 1), m = a + b - 2. 

   As the terms in the final logical solution affected by the co- 

    efficient - are the same as in the first problem of this chapter, 

    the conditions among the constants will be the same, viz., 

         ap< 1-6(1-a), 6a<l-a(l-p). 


7. Itisa confirmation of the correctness of the above solution that the

expression obtained is symmetrical with respect to the two sets of

quantities/), q, and 1 -p, 1 - q, i. e. that on changing p into I -p, and q into 1 -

q, the expression is unaltered This is apparent from the equation

  Prob.^ = a6{^ (-!-iP-HLiih

employed in deducing the final result. Now if there exist probabilities p, q of

the event E, as consequent upon a knowledge of the occurrences of A and B,

there exist probabilities 1 - p, 1 - a of the contrary event, that is, of the non-

occurrence of E under the same circumstances. As then the data are

unchanged in form, whether we take account in them of the occurrence or of

the non-occurrence of E, it is evident that the solution ought to be, as it is, a

symmetrical function of p, q and 1 -p, 1 - q.

Let us examine the particular case in which p - 1, q = 1. We find

A-a + A-1, A'=-1, l = ab, m = a + b-1,

and substituting

Prob.ay _ -ab + (a + b-l)(2-a-b-ab)-(a + b-2) (ab-a-b+l) Prob.a; ~ - 2a (a + b

- 1)

  -2afl(a + ft-l)

~ - 2a (a + b - 1) ~

It would appear, then, that in this case the events A and B are virtually

independent of each other. The supposition of their invariable association

with some other event E, of the frequency of whose occurrence, except as it

may be inferred from this particular connexion, absolutely nothing is known,

does not establish any dependence between the events A and B themselves. I

apprehend that this conclusion is agreeable to reason, though particular

examples may appear at first sight to indicate a different result. For instance,

if the probabilities of the casting up, 1st, of a particular species of weed,2ndly, of a certain description of zoophytes upon the sea-shore, had been

separately determined, and if it had also been ascertained that neither of these

events could happen except during the agitation of the waves caused by a

tempest, it would, I think, justly be concluded that the events in question

were not independent. The picking up of a piece of seaweed of the kind

supposed would, it is presumed, render more probable the discovery of the

zoophytes than it would otherwise have been. But I apprehend that this fact is

due to our knowledge of another circumstance not implied in the actual

conditions of the problem, viz., that the occurrence of a tempest is but an

occasional phenomenon. Let the range of observation be confined to a sea

ahcays vexed with storm. It would then, I suppose, be seen that the casting up

of the weeds and of the zoophytes ought to be regarded as independent

events. Now, to speak more generally, there are conditions common to all

phsenomena,—conditions which, it is felt, do not affect their mutual

independence. I apprehend therefore that the solution indicates, that when a

particular condition has prevailed through the whole of our recorded

experience, it assumes the above character with reference to the class of

phenomena over which that experience has extended.

8. PROBLEM IV.—To illustrate in some degree the above observations, let there

be given, in addition to the data of the last problem, the absolute probability

of the event E, the completed system of data being


    Prob. x = a, Prob. y = b, Prob. z = c, 

    Prob. xz = ap, Prob. yz = bq, 


and let it be required to find Prob. xy.

  Assuming, as before, xz = s, yz = t, xy = w, the final logical equation is

w = xystz + xysTz + 0 (xystz + xy~tz + xyzst + xyzsl

                                                                      + xyzsT+ xyzsT).

+ terms whose coefficients are -. (1)

The algebraic system having been formed, the subsequent eliminations may

be simplified by the transformations adopted in the previous problem. The

final result is

                      (1g)
Prob. xy = ab {«  "^" }. (2)
                      +The conditions among the constants are

c 5 ap, c> bq, c < 1 - a (1 - p), c < 1 - b (1 - q).

Now if/) = 1, q = 1, we find

Prob. xy = —,

c not admitting of any value less than a or b. It follows hence that if the event

E is known to be an occasional one, its invariable attendance on the events x

and y increases the probability of their conjunction in the inverse ratio of its

own frequency.

The formula (2) may be verified in a large number of cases. As a particular

instance, let q = c, we find

Prob. xy~ab, (3)

Now the assumption q = c involves, by Definition (Chap. XVI.) the

independence of the events B and E. If then B and E are independent, no

relation which may exist between A and E can establish a relation between A

and B; wherefore A and B are also independent, as the above equation (3)

implies.

It may readily be shown from (2) that the value of Prob. z, which renders

Prob. xy a minimum, is

            V(P9)
  Prob z = 

Ifp = q, this gives

Prob. z = p;

a result, the correctness of which may be shown by the same considerations

which have been applied to (3).

  PROBLEM V.—Given the probabilities of any three events, and the probability

of their conjunction; required the probability of the conjunction of any two of

them.

  Suppose the data to be

Prob. x = p, Prob. y = q, Prob. z = r, Prob. xyz = m,

and the quesitum to be Prob. xy.  Assuming xyz = s, xy = t, we find as the final logical equation,

t = xyzs + xyzl+ 0(xyl+ xs) + - (sum of all other constituents); whence,

finally,

wherein p = 1 -p, &c. H= ~pq + (p + q)r.

This admits of verification when p = 1, when q = 1, when r = 0, and therefore

m = 0, &c.

Had the condition, Prob. z = r, been omitted, the solution would still have

been definite. We should have had

9
 1 - m

and it may be added, as a final confirmation of their correctness, that the

above results become identical when m ^pqr.

9. The following problem is a generalization of Problem I., and its

solution, though necessarily more complex, is obtained by a similar analysis.

  PROBLEM VI.—If an event can only happen as a consequence of one or more of

certain causes A A„.. A, and if generally c represent the probability of the
                  uK;

cause A , and pi the probability that if the cause Ai exist, the event E will
        f

occur, then the series of values of Cj and pi being given, required the

probability of the event E*

Let the causes A A,.. A be represented by x,, x,.. x., and the event E by z.
                    u2nt

  Then we have generally,

Prob. xi = c„ Prob. xz = ctpt.
                          t

Further, the condition that E can only happen in connexion with some one or

more of the causes A A..A establishes the logical condition,
                      u„„

  *(l-x,)(l -*,).. (l-x.)-0. (1)



• It may be proper to remark, that the above problem was proposed to the

notice of mathematicians by the author in the Cambridge and Dublin

Mathematical Journal, Nor. 1851, accompanied by the subjoined

observations:  "The motives which have led me, after much consideration, to adopt, with

reference to this question, a course unusual in the present day, and not upon

slight grounds to be revived, are the following:—First, I propose the question

as a test of the sufficiency of received methods. Secondly, I anticipate that its

discussion will in some measure add to our knowledge of an important

branch of pure analysis. However, it is upon the former of these grounds

alone that I desire to rest my apology.

  "While hoping that some may be found who, without departing from the

line of their previous studies, may deem this question worthy of their

attention, I wholly disclaim the notion of its being offered as a trial of

personal skill or knowledge, but desire that it may be viewed solely with

reference to those public and scientific ends for the sake of which alone it is

proposed."

The author thinks it right to add, that the publication of the above problem

led to some interesting private correspondence, but did not elicit a solution.

Now let us assume generally

.i, 2 t,,

which is reducible to the form

XJZ(1 - <j) + ti(l - atiZ) = 0,

forming the type of a system of n equations which, together with (1), express

the logical conditions of the problem. Adding alt these equations together, as

after the previous reduction we are permitted to do, we have

S {xz(l -<<)+<,(l-**)}+z(l -*0(1 -x)..(l-xn) = 0, (2)
  iiz

(the summation implied by 2 extending from t = 1 to i = n), and this single

and sufficient logical equation, together with the 2 M data, represented by the

general equations

Prob. Xi = ci, Prob. £j - c,pj, (3)

constitute the elements from which we are to determine Prob. z. Let (2) be

developed with respect to z. We have

[S{*,(l-<<) + '< 0"*<)} +(l-*i)(l -*,)..(I-*.)]*

+ 2<i(l -z) = 0, whence2<i



                                                                                        (4)



  S^-Sja^l-<O + rKl-zOl-Cl-zOCl-^-'C-*,.)

Now any constituent in the expansion of the second member of the above

equation will consist of 2n factors, of which n are taken out of the set x„ x%,

..x, 1 - xx 1 - x,.. 1 - x„, and n out of the set t„ t, ..t„ 1 - r„ 1 - <„.. 1 - £„, no
n,22

such combination as a?i (1 - a;), ri(l - <i), being admissible. Let us consider
                                  i

first those constituents of which (1 - £i), (1 - t).. (1 - t) forms the <-factor,
                                                    2n

that is the factor derived from the set t.. 1 - t
                                            uu

The coefficient of any such constituent will be found by changing t t,.. t
                                                                                  i,2n

respectively into 0 in the second member of (4), and then assigning to xu

x%,.. x their values as dependent upon the nature of the avfactor of the
      n

constituent. Now simply substituting for t t,. . t the value 0, the second
                                                u2n

member becomes

0

- 2r< - (1 -a:,) (1 - x) . . (1 -*„)'
                        2

and this vanishes whatever values, 0, 1, we suhsequently assign to SE a;,,.. x.
                                                                                U
                                                                                        n

For if those values are not all equal to 0, the term 2x, does not vanish, and if

they are all equal to 0, the term - (1 - a:,). .(1 - a;„) becomes - 1, so that in

either case the denominator does not vanish, and therefore the fraction does.

Hence the coefficients of all constituents of which (1 - <,) .. (1 - t) is a factor
                                                                            n

will be 0, and as the sum of all possible avconstituents is unity, there will be

an aggregate term 0 (1 - ti) .. (1 - t) in the development of z.
                                      n

  Consider, in the next place, any constituent of which the ^-factor is <2 t.. t
                                                                                      2r

(1 - t).. (1 - t), r being equal to or greater than unity. Making in the second
    Mn

member of (4), f2 = 1,.. t = 1, tm = 0,.. t„ = 0, we get the expression
                            r


                          r 

    *i.. + Xr - WW .. - x - (1 - a:,) (1 - SB,) .. (1 - x)' 
                            nnNow the only admissible values of the symbols being 0 and 1, it is evident

that the above expression will be equal to 1 when Xi" 1.. x <■ 1, x.i ■ 0,.. x -
                                                                    rrn

0, and that for all other combinations of value that expression will assume a

value greater than unity. Hence the coefficient 1 will be applied to all

constituents of the final development which are of the form

a;,.. Xr (1 - x) . - (1 - *.) <,.. t (1 - t) .. (1 - t),
              MrMn

the x-factor being similar to the ^-factor, while other constituents included

under the present case will have the virtual coefficient -. Also, it is manifest

that this reasoning is independent

of the particular arrangement and succession of the individual symbols.

  Hence the complete expansion of z will be of the form z = S(AT) + 0(1 -t)
                                                                                        t

(1 - t,). .(1 - t)
              n

                                        + constituents whose coefficients are -, (5)

where T represents any ^-constituent except (1 -£,).. (I - r„), and X the

corresponding or similar constituent of a;,.. x.
                                                    nKor instance, if n.=2, we shall have
S(XT) = zstity + 5T + iz Ty,
%, Ty &o. standing for 1 -2y, 1 - 23, &.; whence
zenmtb+nH T+ TaT

HO@ETEnRRT+ RRAGRELE) (6)

< 8 1
+ constituents whose coefficients are 5.

This result agrees, difference of notation being allowed for, with
the developed form of z in Problem 1. of this chapter, as it evi-
dently ought to do.

10. To avoid complexity, I purpose to deduce from the above
equation (6) the necessary conditions for the determination of
Prob. z for the particular case in which n = 2, in such a form as
may enable us, by pursuing in thought the same line of investi-
gation, to asign the corresponding conditions for the more gene-
ral case in which n possesses any integral value whatever.

‘Supposing then n = 2, we have

Veamtib+ o bl + nhh+ anhibh+ o 2hG
+RaBh+ RELE.

 

 

 

nEtt+ 2 HBOT + F 5T
7 s

the conditions for the determination of z,, &, &e., being

Prob.z =

L+ Bt anEh A nGh

   

o
nabt+ RaTt e nhh+ Rakh
e

aobbra Tl sonhbihatt

- ap ap :
Divide the members of this system of equations by x, x, 7,7s, and the

numerator and denominator of Prob. z by the same quantity, and in the results

assume

X\ tl Xi t Xi Xi . .
          2

^-= = HI =^= = m, -=n,, - = n,; (7)
      M
                  2we find
Piobiiim mm, 4 my + my ,
mmy sy 4y L

and T 4 T Ryl + Wy TR+ R, 4 R
e T e
T B i 1y )
‘whence, if we assume,
) (s =M, us )@ D=N, ()

we have, after a slight reduction,

 

mm+l) m(u+l) m(m+l)

 

 

a(l-p) a(-p) ap aps
o,
mM mM___ mN
i+ Deap miDep urDa(-p)
N “M+N-

 

T a(-p

Now let a similar series of transformations and reductions be
performed in thought upon the final logical equation (5). We
shall obtain for the determination of Prob. z the following ex-

ession :
B M-1
MN-T (19)

 

Prob.z =

wherein
M= (ms1) (m+1) .. (mat 1),

Ne(m+l)(mel).. (n+l)
+ Mlas My « . 7y, being given by the system of equations,

mM_ wmM o omM
m+)ap (m+1)ep " (m+1)copa

N N
(uaDea(l-p) " (e Dea(l-pa)

Still farther to simplify the results, assume

 

~usv-r D

 
 

 

 

oMo oo L e M
m+Da(-p) m+Da(l-p) " @arl)ca(l-pay
whence

 

and finally,

 

Substitute these values with those of 2 and Nin (9), and
we have

B
G=capn) w+v-1

 
 

i
vea(l-po) ate-1
which may be reduced to the symmetrical form

 

 

- (u = eapa)

@
dv-el-p)) (9

 
 

3)
Let us then assume 1 - v = u, we have then

"Aua(ﬂ"'-}"x) (u=eapa)

w

J-a@-p)-u..(1-a(-p)-u)
T—ur
If we make for simplicity

  CxPx - an cp = a, 1 - c, (1 - pi) = ft,, &c., the above equations may be
              nnn

written as follows:      aa
  M-w>-'^;fc-">, (H)

wherein

This value of fi substituted in (14) will give an equation involving only u,

the solution of which will determine Prob. z, since by (13) Prob. z = u. It

remains to assign the limits of a.

11. Now the very same analysis by which the limits were determined in the

particular case in which n = 2, (XIX. 12) conducts us in the present case to

the following result. The quantity «, in order that it may represent the value

of Prob. z, must must have for its inferior limits the quantities a,, a, . . «,,, and
                                                                              2

for its superior limits the quantities b ft2,. . b, a, + a. . + a. We may hence
                                          un2u

infer, a priori, that there will always exist one root, and only one root, of the

equation (14) satisfying these conditions. I deem it sufficient, for practical

verification, to show that there will exist one, and only one, root of the

equation (14), between the limits a,, a, .. a„, and bi, ft2, . ,b.
                                          ,n

First, let us consider the nature of the changes to which fi is subject in (15),

as u varies from a,, which we will suppose the greatest of its minor limits, to

6,, which we will suppose the least of its major limits. When u = a it is
                                                                              it

evident that fi is positive and greater than a,. When u = bi, we have fi = ft,,

which is also positive. Between the limits u = a,, u = b, it may be shown that
                                                              x

/u increases with u. Thus we have

                                                                    x
djt  , _ (b, -«)..(&„- u) _ (b - u) (b -«)..(&„- t<) du (1-ti)" (1-«)»-»
  =s2

                                                                  (6,-)(6,-u)..(6-) (16)
                                                                      M„M

                                      v
                                        ' (1—«)"

Now let

6i - M b- u
          n

Evidently xx z,, . . x, will be proper fractions, and we have
            in

du ,

.j- = 1 - X2Xi ..x„-xx,..x .. - Xi X2 .. x.\ +(n -1) Xix . . x
                      in%in

- 1 - (1 - xC) x, «i.. x - *, (1 - *,) X2.. *, ..
                          n- a:, a;, .. a;„.i (1 - a;„) - a;, x.. x.
                                  7n

Now the negative terms in the second member are (if we may borrow the

language of the logical developments) constituents formed from the fractional

quantities X x, .. x. Their sum
            i,in

cannot therefore exceed unity; whence -j- is positive, and /u increases with u

between the limits specified. Now let (14) be written in the form

0* - fli) . . (M - a»)









- (u~u)=0,
and assume u = a,. The first member becomes

  (.-aO^-^-^-l}, (18)

and this expression is negative in value. For, making the same assumption in

(15), we find


           (6, - K) .. (6„ - u) 

    fi- <*i = ^ -p——±— = a positive quantity. 


At the same time we have

(fi - a,) . .(fi - a„) p-Qz fk-a*

in . .'

and since the factors of the second member are positive fractions, that

member is less than unity, whence (18) is negative. Wherefore the

assumption u = ai makes the first member of (17) negative.

  Secondly, let u = ft,, then by (15) /u = u = fii, and the first member o/"(17)

becomes positive.

  Lastly, between the limits u = a and u=b the first member of (17)
                                      xi,

continuously increases. For the first term of that expression written under the

form(JI - ax) . .

increases, since /u increases, and, with it, every factor contained. Again, the

negative term n - u diminishes with the increase of W, as appears from its

value deduced from (15), viz.,


    (&, -«)..(&.- W) 

      (1-«)-' 


Hence then, between the limits « = ai , u = b the first member of (17)
                                                  lt

continuously increases, changing in so doing from a negative to a positive

value. Wherefore, between the limits assigned, there exists one value of u,

and only one, by which the said equation is satisfied.

12. Collecting these results together, we arrive at the following solution of

the general problem.

The probability of the event E will be that value of u deduced from the

equation

  _,>-*fr>^0t-*fr),

wherein

    {l-(l-p,)-«)..{l-c(l-^)-»l
    Cl„

    U+
P- (1 - «)-,'

which (value) lies between the two sets of quantities,

cipu cp, .. c„p„and 1 - c, (1 -pi), 1 -c, (1 -p) .. 1 - c„ (1 -p„),
      222

the former set being its inferior, the latter its superior, limits.

And it may further be inferred in the general case, as it has been proved in

the particular case of n = 2, that the value of w, determined as above, will not

exceed the quantity

Cl.Pl + c,pi . . + c„p„.

13. Particular verifications are subjoined.

1st. Let pi = 1, p = 1, .. p = 1. This is to suppose it certain, that if any one
                    tn

of the events Ai, A .. A „, happen, the event E will happen. In this case, then,
                    ithe probability of the occurrence of£ will simply be the probability that the

events or causes A, A .. A do not all fail of occurring, and its expression will
                    l2n

therefore be 1 - (1 - c,) (1 - c,) . . (1 - c„).

Now the general solution (19) gives







 

wherein
a-ue
==

 

Hence,
1 - u = (1 - ) . . (1 - c), .-. u = 1 - (1 - ) . . (1 - c), equivalent to the a priori
              ClCl

determination above. 2nd. Let ^, =0, p = 0, p = 0, then (19) gives XX - u =
                                            2n

J/, .•. «= 0, as it evidently ought to be.

3rd. Let c, c..c be small quantities, so that their squares and products may
            :in

be neglected. Then developing the second members of the equation (19),

                                                            ni
                            xt" - (c,p, + cp . . + cp) fi
                                            22nn

    U=
"-   xx


    = xt - (c,pi + cp . . + c„p„), 
                      22

    •\ w = c,/>, + cp. . + cp. 
                      22n„


Now this is what the solution would be were the causes An A . . A
                                                                          2n

mutually exclusive. But the smaller the probabilities of those causes, the

more do they approach the condition of being mutually exclusive, since the

smaller is the probability of any concurrence among them. Hence the result

above obtained will undoubtedly be the limiting form of the expression for

the probability of E.

4th. In the particular case of n = 2, we may readily eliminate xx from the

general solution. The result is

(u - c,p,) (« - cp) {1 - d (1 - />,) - «) {1 - c (1 - p) - u] ctfi + cp - u 1 - u
                222222

which agrees with the particular solution before obtained for this case,

Problem I.

  Though by the system (19), the solution is in general made to depend upon

the solution of an equation of a high order, its practical difficulty will not begreat. For the conditions relating to the limits enable us to select at once a

near value of u, and the forms of the system (19) are suitable for the

processes of successive approximation.

14. PROBLEM 7.—The data being the same as in the last problem, required the

probability, that if any definite and given combination of the causes A A,. .A,
                                                                                  i,in

present itself, the event E will be realized.

The cases A, A, . . An, being represented as before by «i, x, . . x
                iiin

respectively, let the definite combination of them, referred to in the statement

of the problem, be represented by the <j> (a!i, x2. . x) so that the actual
                                                              n

occurrence of that combination will be expressed by the logical equation,

The data are








Prob.z, = ci, .. Prob.z, = ca, ®
Prob. a2 = e,ps, Prob. 2,z = capa;

and the object of investigation is
Prob. ¢ (2 2. 5) 2 o
                                                                                        (2)



Prob. <p (xux.. x)
                  2n


    We shall first seek the value of the numerator. 

   Let us assume, 


                                                                    xz = t..xz = t, (3)
                                                                      xxnn

0 (xi, x. . x) z = w. (4)
          2n

Or, if for simplicity, we represent $ (x  x. . x) by <p, the last
                                            i,2n

equation will be

                                                                              $z = w, (5)

to which must be added the equation

                                                                      iix2. .x„z = 0. (6)Now any equation xrz = t of the system (3) may be reduced
                                T

to the form

xzT + t (1 - xz) = 0.
rrrr

Similarly reducing (5), and adding the different results together, we obtain

the logical equation




















Szttt (1 -22) ) + 71 Zaz+ g0+ w0(1 -92)=0, (T7)

from which = being eliminated, © must be determined us a de-
veloped logical function of 21, .- 2y t - fa-

Now making sucoessively z =1, z=0 in the above equation,
and multiplying the results together, we have

(S (@4 Trte) + Ty T+ $16 + W) x (ty + w) = 0.

Developing this equation with reference to w, and replacing
in the result ¢, + 1 by 1, in nocordanco with Prop.1. Chap. rx.,

we have
Eo+E(1-w)=0;
wherein
EeS@G+4E)+ . . Tt ho

E=S(2(@h + t5) + T .. T + ¢}
s, (=¢ )+ T ¢}

 

®
The second member of this equation we must now develop with respect to

the double series of symbols x, x» . . *», <i, t2,.. t. In effecting this object, it
                                  xn

will be most convenient to arrange the constituents of the resulting

development in three distinct classes, and to determine the coefficients proper

to those classes separately.

First, let us consider those constituents of which 7[ .. 7„ is a factor. Making

h = 0 . . t = 0, we find
        n

  E'= 0, E = 2# + xi .. x„ + 0.
                r

It is evident, that whatever values (0, 1) are given to the a;-symbols, .Edoe8

not vanish. Hence the coefficients of all constituents involving 7i . . T„ are 0.

  Consider secondly, those constituents which do not involve the factor 7"i..

7„, and which are symmetrical with reference to the two sets of symbols Xi..

x„ and ti.. t„. By symmetrical constituents is here meant those which wouldremain unchanged if x were converted into t,, x into t &c., and vice versa.
                        x22,

The constituents #i . . x t . . tn, Xi . . x 7i . . J, &c, are in this sense
                          nimn

symmetrical.

For all symmetrical constituents it is evident that

2 (x 7 + t X)
      rrrr

vanishes. For those which do not involve 7 .. ?„, it is further evident that x,. .
                                                  x

x also vanishes, whence
n

E = ~$ E = 2< (</,),
                  r





 
For those constituents of which the x-factor is found in </> the second

member of the above equation becomes 1; for those of which the x-factor is

found in ^ it becomes 0. Hence the coefficients of symmetrical constituents

not involving 7, .. ?„, of which the x-factor is found in <p will be 1; of those

of which the x-factor is not found in 0 it will be 0.

  Consider lastly, those constituents which are unsymmetrical with reference

to the two sets of symbols, and which at the same time do not involve 7\ .. 7,.

Here it is evident, that neither E nor E can vanish, whence the numerator of

the fractional value of w in (8) must exceed the denominator. That value

cannot therefore be represented

by 1, 0, or -. It must then, in the logical development,be represented by -.

Such then will be the coefficient of this class

of constituents.

15. Hence the final logical equation by which w is expressed as a

developed logical function of x  . . x„, £,,. . t, will be of the form
                                    i,n

w = 2, (XT) + 0 [ ^(XT) + 7,.. 7, ) + ^ (sum of other con

                                                                            0
 stituents), w

wherein 2] (XT) represents the sum of all symmetrical constituents of which

the factor X is found in $, and 2, (XT'), the sum of all symmetrical

constituents of which the factor X is not found in <p,—the constituent x,.. x„7, .. 7„, should it appear, being in either case rejected.

  Passing from Logic to Algebra, it may be observed, that here and in all

similar instances, the function V, by the aid of which the algebraic system of

equations for the determination of the values of x  .. x„, t,.. t is formed, is
                                                        i,in

independent of the nature of any function $ involved, not in the expression of

the data, but in that of the quasitum of the problem proposed. Thus we have

in the present example,

Prob. w = ±=—-,

wherein V= 2, (XT) + 2(XT) + t.. T
                          2tn

= S(^)+<,^, (10)

Here 2(ir) represents the sum of all symmetrical constituents of the x and t

symbols, except the constituent 5|. . x„, T . . T. This value of V is the same as
                                                {n

that virtually employed in the solution of the preceding problem, and hence

we may avail ourselves of the results there obtained.

If then, as in the solution referred to, we assume

X\ t\ Xt Xi „
        nn

  ^-=r = ,n,, =-=- = m, — = »„ <£c.,
                          n

X\ tl X i Xi
        nn

we shall obtain a result which may be thus written:

                                            M

Mi being formed by rejecting from the function 0 the constituent Xi. .x if it is
                                                                                  m

there found, dividing the result by the same constituent Xi.. x„, and then

changing -J- into m„ ^ into m  and
                                2,

Xi X2

so on. The values of M and N are the same as in the preceding problem.

Reverting to these and to the corresponding values of »u m„ &c., we find

Prob. to = Mi (n + v - 1), the general values of m, n being
                                                            rr

crp cr(l-p)
  rrLi - tp p - C (1 - p)
      rrrr

and it and v being given by the solution of the system of equa









































v-ea(l-pa)} |

 

wry-1-(zap) (o) | fooo(op)l:

The aboe value of Prob. w will be the numerator of the fraction
(2). It now remains to determine its denominator.
For this purpose assume
(@2 =,
or $-vi
whence $5+ 9§ =0,
Substituting the first member of this equation in (7) in place of

the corresponding form ¢275 + w (1 - =) we obtain as the primary
logical equation,

  

S(azh+t(1-22) +T1. T2+ ¢34 55 =0,

 

whence climinating =, and reducing by Prop. 1. Chap. IX.,

$5405+ S (S0 T+ 4 F) 4T T = 0

 

Hence
¢+ 3 (S(2 T +4T)+ T
v @I Z I LTI R R T
261

 

and developing as before,
XD+ 0. L2 (X) + 0B (XT) +F. L %H(X))

 

+5 (aum of other constituents). (12)

Here %,(X) indicates the sum of all constituents found in g,
,(X) the sum of all constituents not found in ¢ The expres-
sions are indeed used in place of ¢ and 1~ $ to presorve sym-
‘metry.

It follows hence that 3, (X) + 5 (X) = 1, and that, as be-
fore, T, (XT) + % (XT) = £(X7). Hence V will have the
same value as before, and we shall have

Prob.p - 2D 0GR )

Or transforming, as in the previous case,

M+ N,

th.u:m.

(13)
wherein Nl is formed by dividing <j> by 5?,. . x, and changing in
                                                        nthe result = into n =? into re^, &c.
                    M

Now the final solution of the problem proposed will be given by assigning

their determined values to the terms of the fraction


    Prob. 0(jr,,.. x) z Prob. w 
            ,n

 Prob. <j> (x,,.. x)' Prob. v' 
                        n


Hence, therefore, by (11) and (13) we have

Prob. sought = ^—^.

A very slight attention to the mode of formation of the functions Mi and N^

will show that the process may be greatly simplified. We may, indeed, exhibit

the solution of the general problem in the form of a rule, as follows:

Reject from the function ^(i;,,!,.. x) the constituent J,. .xif it is therein
                                          nn

contained, suppress in all the remaining constituents the factors x x, SfC,
                                                                            li2

and change generally in the result x into
                                        r

crPr
 . Call this result M,.

H - cp
    rr

Again, replace in the function <p(xx . . x„) the constituent xi • • x if it is
                                            ltin

therein found, by unity; suppress in all the remaining constituents the factors

£,, x, Sfc., and change generally in the re. c(l-p)
  2rr

              !
SUlt x into .- —r.
    r

v-c(l-p) Then the solution required will be expressed by the formula
  rr

  KTK 0>

H and v being determined by the solution of the system of equations

              C
U I V 1 -(^-'^)--(M-C„jon)

_ {v-c(l-p,))..{y-c.(l-p.)}
        l

                                                                                        li
                                                                                ~^i • K>)

It may be added, that the limits of ft and v are the same as in the previous

problem. This might be inferred from the general principle of continuity; butconditions of limitation, which are probably sufficient, may also be

established by other considerations.

  Thus from the demonstration of the general method in probabilities, Chap.

XVII. Prop, iV., it appears that the quantities a;|,.. x„ <„ .. t„ in the primary

system of algebraic equations, must be positive proper fractions. Now

xr c(l -p)
  rr

1 - x V - C(l -p)
      rrr

Hence generally n must be a positive quantity, and therefore we must have
                    r

v>c(l -p).
  rr

In like manner since we have

x t cv
rrrr

- m
    r


                c
  (l-x)(l-t) (l~rPr
    rr

we must have generally

H > cp
        rr

16. It is probable that the two classes of conditions thus represented are

together sufficient to determine generally which of the roots of the equations

determining f t and v are to be taken. Let us take in particular the case in

which n = 2. Here we have

  (ft-cipi) (ft-cp) c^pictpi
                2t

                                                                  c,p, c,p, (/u - cp)c.p
                                                                                    il2

••• v = 1 - c,pi - cp, + —£- — = 1 - c,», - - -———.
                      t

                                                                                      /* ^

Whence, since f t > c,P, we have generally

V < 1 - C,J0i.

In like manner we havev < 1 - cp„ fi< I-ci(l-p), n<l-c(l-p).
        2t22

Now it has already been shown that there will exist but one value of f t

satisfying the whole of the above conditions relative to that quantity, viz.

f t > cp, fl< 1 - c (1 - p),
      rrrr

whence the solution for this case, at least, is determinate. And I apprehend

that the same method is generally applicable and sufficient. But this is a

question upon which a further degree of light is desirable.

To verify the above results, suppose <p (x . .x„) = 1, which is virtually the
                                                    u

case considered in the previous problem. Now the development of 1 gives all

possible constituents of the symbols x.. x. Proceeding then according to the
                                            un

Rule, we find

M =  ^-. r - 1 = £_— _ 1 by (15).
    l7

    vv
N „ " ! i.

  '{V-C,(1-JB,)} .. {v-c(l-p)} n + v-l
                nn

Substituting in (14) we find

Prob. z = 1 - v,

which agrees with the previous solution.

  Again, let 0 (a;„ .. x) = x which, after development and suppression of the
                        nu

factors i,.. x„, gives X (JT2 +1).. (x +1), whence we find
        2ln- app __ap
M= G- Gmap) “Ee w17 (0

- ¢ ) v .a(-p)
R e ey e Pt (e e

Substituting, we have
Probability that if the event 4, occur, E will occur = p;.
And this result is verified by the data. Similar verifications

might casily be added.
“Let us examine the case in which

 

 

   

$ (@0 2) =TT Fat R,

Here we find

 

whence we have the following result—
Probability that if some one -j cp
                                    rr

alone of the causes AA..A 1 n - cp
                        u2nrr

present itself, the event E F ^ cp" ~ c(l -jo) will follow. J fi-cp v-c(l-p)
                                    rrrrrrrr

Let it be observed that this case is quite different from the well-known one

in which the mutually exclusive character of the causes Au.. A is one of the
                                                                        n

elements of the data, expressing a condition under which the very

observations by which the probabilities of A A &c. are supposed to have
                                                  uX)

been determined, were made.

  Consider, lastly, the case in which <p (x.. x) = x x,.. x,. Here
                                                  iinx

      ccc
M = 'Pf »P«  iPi--c%p%
                  m

'" (p-cipi)..(fi-cp) ^"'(/t + w-l)'
                  nn

N = C,(l-jPi)..C„(l-p.) = C,(l -pi)..cn(l -pn)

M
\ [v-c(l-p))..{v-c(l-p)) v»-'(/u + v - 1)'
      iiuu

Hence the following result—

Probability that if all the" causes A . . A„ conspire, the event E will follow.
                                        uPre

 Par™
 

Pre P+ (1 -p, 1=pu) u™*
This expression assumes, as it ought to do, the value 1 when any one of the

quantities pi,.. p is equal to 1.
                n

17. PROBLEM VIII.—Certain causes Au A.. A being so restricted that they
                                              2n

cannot all fail, but still can only occur in certain definite combinations

denoted by the equation

$ \Au A.. A„) = 1,
          2

and there being given the separate probabilities c,. ,c of the said causes, and
                                                        in

the corresponding probabilities p .. p that an event E will follow if those
                                      Hn

respective causes are realized, required the probability of the event E.

This problem differs from the one last considered in several particulars, but

chiefly in this, that the restriction denoted by the equation 0 (-4,,.. A) = 1,
                                                                              n

forms one of the data, and is supposed to be furnished by or to be accordant

with the very experience from which the knowledge of the numerical

elements of the problem is derived.

  Representing the events A.. A„ by xx.. x respectively, and the event E by
                                2,in

z, we have—

  Prob.x - c, Prob.xrz = cp. (1)
        rrrr

Let us assume, generally,

xz — (,
rr

then combining the system of equations thus indicated with the equations

x^.x.-O, 0(x„ ..x,,) = 1, or 0 = 1,

furnished in the data, we ultimately find, as the developed expression of z,

        ,
z = S(Z7) + 0T7..7.2(X), (2)
                i2

where X represents in succession each constituent found in 0, and T a similar

series of constituents of the symbols tu..t; S(XT) including only symmetrical
                                              nconstituents with reference to the two sets of symbols.

The method of reduction to be employed in the present case is so similar to

the one already exemplified in former problems, that I shall merely exhibit

the results to which it leads. We find

with the relations

Afi M Ni N
        nn

. . = ■ —. r = —.  = M + N. (4)
            rrN

clPl Cp Ci(l-pi) C„(l -Pn)
      nn

Wherein M is formed by suppressing in 0 (xx.. x„) all the factors xi,..x„, and
                                                    i

changing in the result Xi into mi, x into m, while Nis formed by substituting
                                        „n

in M, rii for wi &c.; moreover Ml consists of that portion of M of which mi
                i5

is a factor, Ni of that portion of N of which «i is a factor; and so on.

Let us take:, in illustration, the particular case in which the causes A.. A
                                                                                  Yn

are mutually exclusive. Here we have

0 (Xi, . . X) m Xi X. . X„ . . . + X„ 5, . . X,.,.
              n2


















‘Whence
M=m+my..tm,

Nooty ety
My=m, Ni=m, &
Substituting, we have
mo_m m
ap " Tep a(l-p) T a@(-p)
Hence we find

 

=M+ N.

eyt

MW,
e

  

or M

— . M+N.
Qpie-tapa

Hence, by (3),
Prob.z = ¢,py .-+ €up
a known result.

  There are other particular cases in which the system (4) admits of ready

solution. It is, however, obvious that in most instances it would lead to resultsof great complexity. Nor does it seem probable that the existence of a

functional relation among causes, such as is assumed in the data of the

general problem, will often be presented in actual experience; if we except

only the particular cases above discussed.

Had the general problem been modified by the restriction that the event

Ecannot occur, all the causes A..A being absent, instead of the restriction that
                                  in

the said causes cannot all fail, the remaining condition denoted by the

equation <j> (A.. An) = 1 being retained, we should have found for the final
                  it

logical equation

  2=S,(Xr) + 0 2(Z),

2 {X) being, as before, equal to <j, (a;,,.. x), but ^i (X T) formed by rejecting
                                                n

from <\, the particular constituent x. .x if therein contained, and then
                                        tn

multiplying each ^-constituent of the result by the corresponding <-

constituent. It is obvious that in the particular case in which the causes are

mutually exclusive the value of Prob. z hence deduced will be the same as

before.

18. PROBLEM IX.—Assuming the data of any of the previous problems, let it be

required to determine the probability that if the event E present itself, it will

be associated with the particular cause A; in other words, to determine the a
                                              r

posteriori probability of the cause A when the event E has been observed to
                                        r

occur.

In this case we must seek the value of the fraction

Prob. xrz cp ...... 
              TT/iN

T, , , or ^r-Zr—, by the data. (1)

                  Jv
  Prob.z Prob. z  '

As in the previous problems, the value of Prob. z has heen assigned upon

different hypotheses relative to the connexion or want of connexion of the

causes, it is evident that in all those cases the present problem is susceptible

of a determinate solution by simply substituting in (1) the value of that

element thus determined.

If the d priori probabilities of the causes are equal, we have c, = c2.. = c.
                                                                                      r

Hence for the different causes the value (1) will vary directly as the quantityp. Wherefore whatever the nature of the connexion among the causes, the d
r

posteriori probability of each cause will be proportional to the probability of

the observed event E when that cause is known to exist. The particular case

of this theorem, which presents itself when the causes are mutually exclusive,

is well known. We have then

Prob. xz cp _ p
          rrrr

Prob. z 2.crp pi+ p ..+ />„'
                ri

the values of c, . . c being equal.
                in

  Although, for the demonstration of these and similar theorems in the

particular case in which the causes are mutually exclusive, it is not necessary

to introduce the functional symbol <p, which is, indeed, to claim for

ourselves the choice of all possible and conceivable hypotheses of the

connexion of the causes, yet, under every form, the solution by the method of

this work of problems, in which the number of the data is indefinitely great,

must always partake of a somewhat complex character. Whether the

systematic evolution which it presents, first, of the logical, secondly, of the

numerical relations of a problem, furnishes any compensation for the length

and occasional tediousness of its processes, I do not presume to inquire. Its

chief value undoubtedly consists in its power,—in the mastery which it gives

us over questions which would apparently baffle the unassisted strength of

human reason. For this cause it has not been deemed superfluous to exhibit in

this chapter its application to problems, some of which may possibly be

regarded as repulsive, from their difficulty, without being recommended by

any prospect of immediate utility. Of the ulterior value of such speculations it

is, I conceive, impossible for us, at present, to form any decided judgment.

19. The following problem is of a much easier description than the

previous ones.

  PROBLEM X.— The probability of the occurrence of a certain natural

phenomenon under given circumstances is p. Observation has also recorded

a probability a of the existence of a permanent cause of that phenomenon, i.e.

of a cause which would always produce the event under the circumstances

supposed. What is the probability that if the phenomenon is observed to occur

n timet in succession under the given circumstances, it will occur the n r 1*

time? What also is the probability, after such observation, of the existence ofthe permanent cause referred to?

FIRST CASE.—Let t represent the existence of a permanent cause, and x x2 .. x
                                                                                uM

the successive occurrences of the natural phenomenon.

If the permanent cause exist, the events xx x. .a; are necessary
                                                    ti„+x

consequences. Hence

t - vX, t = vX2, &c.,
    x

and eliminating the indefinite symbols,

t(l-x) = 0, t(l-x) = 0, <(l-aw) = 0.
  x2

Now we are to seek the probability that if the combination xx x.. x„ happen,
                                                                          2

the event x^i' will happen, i. e. we are to seek the value of the fraction


    Prob. x x .. x 
            {2mx

 Prob. Xi $2.. x 
                      n


We will first seek the value of Prob. Xi JT, .. x.
                                                      n

  Represent the combination x, x,.. x„ by to, then we have the following

logical equations:

  <(l-x,) = 0, *(l-x,) = 0 . . <(1 -x„) = 0,

A'l x . . x = tO.
      2n

Reducing the last to the form

(xl x2.. x) (1 - to) + to (1 - Xi x.. x„) = 0,
            nt

and adding it to the former ones, we have

2£(1 - Xi) + x, a;,.. x (1 - to) + w (1 - Xi x,..x) - 0, (1)
                          nn

wherein 2 extends to all values of i from 1 to n, for the one logical equation

of the data. With this we must connect the numericd conditions,

Prob. X2 = Prob. x.. = Prob. x„ = p, Prob. t = a;
                        2

and our object is to find Prob. to. From (1) we haveJE(-3) 433w

27, 24 2n - 1
2 a;i x.. x„ - 1 2 a;, x.. x - 1
        2%n

on CBveloping with respect to *. This result must further be deveoped with

respect to x x, .. x„.
            u2

low if we make x, = 1, x = 1, .. x„ = 1, the coefficients both of t aid of 1 -1
                          2

become 1. If we give to the same symbols any otherset of values formed by

the interchange of 0 and 1, it is evidat that the coefficient of t will become

negative, while that of 1 -t will become 0. Hence the full development (2)

will be

to = Xx2 . . xt + Xi a;, . . x (1 - t) + 0 (1 - Xi x.. x„) (1 -1)
              HH2

+ constituents whose coefficients are -, or equivalent to -. Herewe have

V~:ixt..xt + x,x,. .x„(l -t) + (1 -x,X2..x,,) (1 - t)
        H

- a;, x,.. at + 1 - t; whnce, passing from Logic to Algebra,
            nHz.atrn(l-t) asn..ntinl-0

 

» ?
Lamemt a0 mment o,
? a

  

oo e 1

From the forms of the above equations it s evident that we

have 2, = 2, .= z.. Replace then each of these quantities by 5
and the system becomes

Aoz 2t L,
P a

 

a

Prob.w = T

 

from which we readily deduce

 

Prob. 0 = Prob. 2, z...,_.u+(p.a)<l_a)"
Ifin this result we change n ato a1+ 1, we get

Prob. 2, 2. Zw = a+ (p - a) (I;'T:)‘.
Hence we find—

®

 
as the expression of the probability that if the phenomenor be n times

repeated, it will also present itself the n + 1* time, fy the method of Chapter

XIX. it is found that a cannot exceec p in value.

The following verifications are obvious:—

1st. If a =0, the expression reduces to p, as it ought o do. For when it is

certain that no permanent cause exists, th successive occurrences of the

phenomenon are independent.

2nd. If p = 1, the expression becomes 1, as it ought to 4c

3rd. If p = a, the expression becomes 1, unless a = 0. If he probability of a

phenomenon is equal to the probability that tbre exists a cause which under

given circumstances would always produce it, then the fact that that

phenomenon has ever been noticed under those circumstances, renderscertain its re-appearance under the same.*

4th. As n increases, the expression approaches in value to unity. This

indicates that the probability of the recurrence of the event increases with the

frequency of its successive appearances,—a result agreeable to the natural

laws of expectation.

  SECOND CASE.—We are now to seek the probability d posteriori of the existence

of a permanent cause of the phenomenon. This requires that we ascertain the

value of the fraction


    Prob. tx x*.. x 
              tH

    Prob. xiX.. x' 
              tn


    the denominator of which has already been determined. 

   To determine the numerator assume 


then proceeding as before, we obtain for the logical development,

w = txi Xi.. x + 0 (1 - t).
            n

Whence, passing from Logic to Algebra, we have at once

Prob. w = a,

a result which might have been anticipated. Substituting then for the

numerator and denominator of the above fraction their values, we have for

the a posteriori probability of a permanent cause, the expression

      * As we can neither re-enter nor recall the state of infancy, we are

    unable to say how far such results as the above serve to explain the

    confidence with which young children connect events whose association

    they have once perceived. But we may conjecture, generally, that the

    strength of their expectations is due to the necessity of inferring (as a

    part of their rational nature), and the narrow but impressive experience

    upon which the faculty is exercised. Hence the reference of every kind

    of sequence to that of cause and effect. A little friend of the author's, on

    being put to bed, was heard to ask his brother the pertinent question,—"

    Why does going to sleep at night make it light in the morning?" The

    brother, who was a year older, was able to reply, that it would be light in

    the morning even if little boys did not go to sleep at night. 
It is obvious that the value of this expression increases with the value of n.

I am indebted to a learned correspondent,* whose original contributions to

the theory of probabilities have already been referred to, for the following

verification of the first of the above results (3).

  "The whole d priori probability of the event (under the circumstances)

being p, and the probability of some cause C which would necessarily

produce it, a, let x be the probability that it will happen if no such cause as C

exist. Then we have the

equation

p = a + (1 - a) x,

whence p-a

x=\ .

1 -a

Now the phenomenon observed is the occurrence of the event n times. The a

priori probability of this would be—

                              1 supposing C to exist,

af supposing C not to exist;

whence the d posteriori probability that C exists is


     a 

    a + (1 - a)x„' 


that C does not exist is


 (l-ajs" 

    a + (I -a)x"' 


Consequently the probability of another occurrence isa , (1 - a) a*

            n
a + (1 - a) x a + (1 - a) x*

                  l
or a + (1 - a) of*

a + (l -a) *„'

        'Professor Donkin.


x a,
which, on replacing n by its value j , will be found to agree

with (3)."

  Similar verifications might, it is probable, also be found for the following

results, obtained by the direct application of the general method.

The probability, under the same circumstances, that if, out of n occasions,

the event happen r times, and fail n-r times, it will happen on the n + 1'* time

is







    

a+mp-)(}
. . n(n-l)..n-r+l -, r

                :
wherein m = — r-n and I = -.

1,2..r u

The probability of a permanent cause (r being less than n) is 0. This is

easily verified.

If p be the probability of an event, and c the probability that if it occur it

will be due to a permanent cause; the probability after n successive observed
                                                ih
occurrences that it will recur on the n + 1 similar occasion is

c + (1 - c)a^


              x
c+ (1 -c) a?*-'

wherein x = -^ -.1 - cp

20. It is remarkable that the solutions of the previous problems are void of

any arbitrary element. We should scarcely, from the appearance of the data,

have anticipated such a circumstance. It is, however, to be observed, that in

all those problems the probabilities of the causes involved are supposed to be

known a priori. In the absence of this assumed element of knowledge, it

seems probable that arbitrary constants would necessarily appear in the final

solution. Some confirmation of this remark is afforded by a class of problems

to which considerable attention has been directed, and which, in conclusion, I

shall briefly consider.

It has been observed that there exists in the heavens a large number of

double stars of extreme closeness. Either these apparent instances of

connexion have some physical ground or they have not. If they have not, we

may regard the phenomenon of a double star as the accidental result of a "

random distribution" of stars over the celestial vault, i. e. of a distribution

which would render it just as probable that either member of the binary

system should appear in one spot as in another. If this hypothesis be assumed,

and if the number of stars of a requisite brightness be known, we can

determine what is the probability that two of them should be found within

such limits of mutual distance as to constitute the observed phenomenon.

Thus Mitchell,* estimating that there are 230 stars in the heavens equal in

brightness to /3 Capricorni, determines that it is 80 to 1 against such a

combination being presented were those stars distributed at random. The

probability, when such a combination has been observed, that there exists

between its members a physical ground of connexion, is then required.

  Again, the sum of the inclinations of the orbits of the ten known planets to

the plane of the ecliptic in the year 1801 was 91° 4187, according to the

French measures. Were all inclinations equally probable, Laplacef

determines, that there would be only the excessively small probability

.00000011235 that the mean of the inclinations should fall within the limit

thus assigned. And he hence concludes, that there is a very high probability in

favour of a disposing cause, by which the inclinations of the planetary orbits

have been confined within such narrow bounds. Professor De Morgan,t

taking the sum of the inclinations at 92°, gives to the above probability the

value .00000012, and infers that "it is 1: .00000012, that there was a

necessary cause in the formation of the solar system for the inclinations beingwhat they are." An equally determinate conclusion has been drawn from

observed coincidences between the direction of circular polarization in rock-

crystal, and that of certain oblique faces in its crystalline structure.*

                            • Phil. Transactions, An. 1767.

    t Theorie Analytique des Probability, p. 276.

    X Encyclopedia Metropolitana. Art. Probabilities.

  These problems are all of a similar character. A certain hypothesis is

framed, of the various possible consequences of which we are able to assign

the probabilities with perfect rigour. Now some actual result of observation

being found among those consequences, and its hypothetical probability

being therefore known, it is required thence to determine the probability of

the hypothesis assumed, or its contrary. In [Mitchell's problem, the

hypothesis is that of a " random distribution of the stars,"—the possible and

observed consequence, the appearance of a close double star. The very small

probability of such a result is held to imply that the probability of the

hypothesis is equally small, or, at least, of the same order of smallness. And

hence the high and, and as some think, determinate probability of a disposing

cause in the stellar arrangements is inferred. Similar remarks apply to the

other examples adduced.

21. The general problem, in whatsoever form it may be presented, admits

only of an indefinite solution. Let x represent the proposed hypothesis, y a

phenomenon which might occur as one of its possible consequences, and

whose calculated probability, on the assumption of the truth of the

hypothesis, is p, and let it be required to determine the probability that if the

phenomenon y is observed, the hypothesis x is true. The very data of this

problem cannot be expressed without the introduction of an arbitrary element.

We can only write

Prob. x = a, Prob. xy = ap; (1)

a being perfectly arbitrary, except that it must fall within the limits 0 and 1

inclusive. If then P represent the conditional probability sought, we have

Prob. xy ap



Prob. y Prob. y It remains then to determine Prob. y.                                                                                        (2)



• Edinburgh Review, No. 185, p. 32. This article, though not entirely free

from error, is well worthy of attention.

Let nj = t, then

r-;-* + £<(i-*)+o(i-o*+§(i-0(i-«). (3)

Hence observing that Prob. x = a, Prob. t = ap, and passing from Logic to

Algebra, we have

-y *iJ ,
      +

with the relations

                                  to + (1 - *) a: to

: '— B — = to + 1 - <.

                                          a ap

  Hence we readily find

Prob. y = ap + c (1 - a). (4)

Now recurring to (3), we find that c is the probability, that if the event (1 -

t) (1 - a:) occur, the event y will occur. But

(1 - t) (1 - x) = (1 - xy) (1 - x) = 1 - x.

  Hence c is the probability that if the event x do not occur, the event y will

occur.

  Substituting the value of Prob. y in (2), we have the following theorem:

  The calculated probability of any phenomenon y, upon an assumed

physical hypothesis x, being p, the d posteriori probability P of the physical

hypothesis, when the phenomenon has been observed, is expressed by the

equation

                                                                                P- ?. , (5)
                                                                                      s

                                                                                          v
                                                                            ap + c(l-a) '

where a and c are arbitrary constants, the former representing the d prioriprobability of the hypothesis, the latter the probability that if the hypothesis

were false, the event y would present itself.

The principal conclusion deducible from the above theorem is that, other

things being the same, the value of P increases and diminishes

simultaneously with that of p. Hence the greater or less the probability of the

phenomenon when the hypothesis is assumed, the greater or less is the

probability of the hypothesis when the phaenomenon has been observed.

When p is very small, then generally P also is small, unless either a is large

or c small. Hence, secondly, if the probability of the phenomenon is very

small when the hypothesis is assumed, the probability of the hypothesis is

very small when the phenomenon is observed, unless either the d priori

probability a of the hypothesis is large, or the probability of the phenomenon

upon any other hypothesis small. The formula (5) admits of exact verification

in various cases, as when c = 0, or a = 1, or a = 0. But it is evident that it

does not, unless there be means for determining the values of a and c, yield a

definite value of P. Any solutions which profess to accomplish this object,

either are erroneous in principle, or involve a tacit assumption respecting the

above arbitrary elements. Mr. De Morgan's solution of Laplace's problem

concerning the existence of a determining cause of the narrow limits within

which the inclinations of the planetary orbits to the plane of the ecliptic are

confined, appears to me to be of the latter description. Having found a

probability^? = .00000012, that the sum of the inclinations would be less than

92° were all degrees of inclination equally probable in each orbit, this able

writer remarks: "If there be a reason for the inclinations being as described,

the probability of the event is 1. Consequently, it is 1: .00000012 (i. e. 1:p),

that there was a necessary cause in the formation of the solar system for the

inclinations being what they are." Now this result is what the equation (5)

would really give, if, assigning

to p the above value, we should assume c = 1, a = -. For we

                                                                                        m

should thus find,

1

p. 2* p1 1 l + p

  ...l-P:P:A:p. (6)

But P representing the probability, d posteriori, that all inclinations are

equally probable, 1 - P is the probability, d posteriori, that such is not the

case, or, adopting Mr. De Morgan's alternative, that a determining cause

exists. The equation (6), therefore, agrees with Mr. Dc Morgan's result.

22. Are we, however, justified in assigning to a and c particular values? I

am strongly disposed to think that we are not. The question is of less

importance in the special instance than in its ulterior bearings. In the received

applications of the theory of probabilities, arbitrary constants do not

explicitly appear; but in the above, and in many other instances sanctioned by

the highest authorities, some virtual determination of them has been

attempted. And this circumstance has given to the results of the theory,

especially in reference to questions of causation, a character of definite

precision, which, while on the one hand it has seemed to exalt the dominion

and extend the province of numbers, even beyond the measure of their

ancient claim to rule the world ;* on the other hand has called forth vigorous

protests against their intrusion into realms in which conjecture is the only

basis of inference. The very fact of the appearance of arbitrary constants in

the solutions of problems like the above, treated by the method of this work,

seems to imply, that definite solution is impossible, and to mark the point

where inquiry ought to stop. We possess indeed the means of interpreting

those constants, but the experience which is thus indicated is as much beyond

our reach as the experience which would preclude the necessity of any

attempt at solution whatever.

  Another difficulty attendant upon these questions, and inherent, perhaps, in

the very constitution of our faculties, is that of precisely defining what is

meant by Order. The manifestations of that principle, except in very complex

instances, we have no difficulty in detecting, nor do we hesitate to impute to

it an almost necessary foundation in causes operating under Law. But to

assign to it a standard of numerical value would be a vain, not to say a

presumptuous, endeavour. Yet must the attempt be made, before we can

aspire to weigh with accuracy the probabibilities of different constitutions of

the universe, so as to determine the elements upon which alone a definite

solution of the problems in question can be established.23. The most usual mode of endeavouring to evade the necessary

arbitrariness of the solution of problems in the theory of probabilities which

rest upon insufficient data, is to assign to some element whose real

probability is unknown all possible degrees of probability; to suppose that

these degrees of probability are themselves equally probable; and, regarding

them as so many distinct causes of the phenomenon observed, to apply the

theorems which represent the case of an effect due to some one of a number

of equally probable but mutually exclusive causes (Problem 9). For instance,

the rising of the sun after a certain interval of darkness having been observed

m times in succession, the probability of its again rising under the same

circumstances is determined, on received principles, in the following manner.

Let p be any unknown probability between 0 and 1, and c (infinitesimal and

constant) the probability, that the probability of the sun's rising after an

interval of darkness lies between the limits p and p + dp. Then the probability

that the sun will rise m times in succession is

      * Mundum regunt nameri.

      .f See an interesting paper by Prof. Forbes in the Philosophical

    Magazine, Dec. 1850; also Mill's Logic, chap, xviii.

  m
c\ pdp;

and the probability that he will do this, and will rise again, or, which is the

same thing, that he will rise m + 1 times in succession, is

  m+x
c\ pdp,

Hence the probability that if he rise m times in succession, he will rise the m

+ 1 '* time, ise ms1
;[‘P"’I' mi2’

 
 
the known and generally received solution.

The above solution is usually founded upon a supposed analogy of the

problem with that of the drawing of balls from an urn containing a mixture of

black and white balls, between which all possible numerical ratios are

assumed to be equally probable. And it is remarkable, that there are two or

three distinct hypotheses which lead to the same final result. For instance, if

the balls are finite in number, and those which are drawn are not replaced, or

if they are infinite in number, whether those drawn are replaced or not, then,

supposing that m successive drawings have yielded only white balls, the
                                                          th
probability of the issue of a white ball at the m + \ drawing is

m + 1 .






m+2
It has been said, that the principle involved in the above and in similar

applications is that of the equal distribution of our knowledge, or rather of

our ignorance—the assigning to different states of things of which we know

nothing, and upon the very ground that we know nothing, equal degrees of

probability. I apprehend, however, that this is an arbitrary method of

procedure. Instances may occur, and one such has been adduced, in which

different hypotheses lead to the same final conclusion. But those instances

are exceptional. With reference to the particular problem in question, it is

shown in the memoir cited, that there is one hypothesis, viz., when the balls

are finite in number and not replaced, which leads to a different conclusion,

and it is easy to see that there are other hypotheses, as strictly involving the

principle of the "equal distribution of knowledge or ignorance," which would

also conduct to conflicting results.

24. For instance, let the case of sunrise be represented by the drawing of a

white ball from a bag containing an infinite number of balls, which are all

either black or white, and let the assumed principle be, that all possible

constitutions of the system of balls are equally probable. By a constitution of

the system, I mean an arrangement which assigns to every ball in the system

a determinate colour, either black or white. Let us thence seek the probability,

that if m white balls are drawn in m drawings, a white ball will be drawn in
          h
the m + V drawing.First, suppose the number of the balls to be fi, and let the symbols x x, . .
                                                                                  i,i

x be appropriated to them in the following manner. Let Xi denote that event
M

which consists in the i'* ball of the system being white, the proposition

declaratory of such a state of things being a:j ■ 1. In like manner the
                                                                          h
compound symbol 1 - x will represent the circumstance of the i' ball being
                          t

black. It is evident that the several constituents formed of the entire set of

symbols xx x2, .. x^ will represent in like manner the several possible
          i

constitutions of the system of balls with respect to blackness and whiteness,

and the number of such constitutions being 2", the probability of each will, in

accordance

      * ee a memoir by Bishop Terrot, Edinburgh Phil. Trans, vol. xX. Part

    iv.

with the hypothesis, be g-. This is the value which we should

find if we substituted in the expression of any constituent for

each of the symbols x, x,.. X, the value =. Hence, then, the
                        xiM

probability of any event which can be expressed as a series of constituents of

the above description, will be found by substituting in such expression the

value - for each of the above

                                            m

symbols.

Now the larger fi is, the less probable it is that any ball which has been

drawn and replaced will be drawn again. As fi approaches to infinity, this

probability approaches to 0. And this being the case, the state of the balls

actually drawn can be expressed as a logical function of m of the symbols

xx..x..X and therefore, by development, as a series of constituents of the said
i?/k,

m symbols. Hence, therefore, its probability will be found by substituting for

each of the symbols, whether in the undeveloped or the developed form, the

value -. But this is the very

m

substitution which it would be necessary, and which it would suffice, to

make, if the probability of a white ball at each drawingwere known, a priori, to be -.

It follows, therefore, that if the number of balls be infinite, and all

constitutions of the system equally probable, the probability of drawing m

white balls in succession will be —, and the

probability of drawing m + 1 white balls in succession ^^;

whence the probability that after m white balls have been drawn,

the next drawing will furnish a white one, will be -. In other words, past

experience does not in this case affect future expectation.

25. It may be satisfactory to verify this result by ordinary methods. To

accomplish this, we shall seek—

  First: The probability of drawing r white balls, and p - r black balls, in p

trials, out of a bag containing fi balls, every ball being replaced after drawing,

and all constitutions of the systems being equally probable, d priori.

  Secondly: The value which this probability assumes when fi becomes

infinite.

  Thirdly: The probability hence derived, that if m white balls are drawn in
                        1
succession, the m+ l" ball drawn will be white also.

The probability that r white balls and p - r black ones will be drawn in p

trials out of an urn containing fi balls, each ball being replaced after trial, and

all constitutions of the system as above defined being equally probable, is

equal to the sum of the probabilities of the same result upon the separate

hypotheses of there being no white balls, 1 white ball,—lastly fi white balls in

the urn. Therefore, it is the sum of the probabilities of this result on the

hypothesis of there being n white balls, n varying from 0 to /u.

Now supposing that there are n white balls, the probability

of drawing a white ball in a single drawing is -, and the proba

bility of drawing r white balls and p - r black ones in a particular order in p

drawings, is

But there being as many such orders as there are combinations of r things in p

things, the total probability of drawing r white balls in p drawings out of the

system of fi balls of which ;* are white, is    >»-;>;.>-"■)(;)'(,-;)T. o

Again, the number of constitutions of the system of p balls, which admit of

exactly n balls being white, is









































 

and the number of possible constitutions of the system is 2*.
Hence the probability that exactly n balls arc white is

p@=1)..(u-n+1)
1.2

Multiplying (1) by this exprossion, and taking the sum of the
products from 7= 0 to 7=y, we have

p(p—;?z.p—r+ 1 !:,L;u ,;;:., 1(’,_:)(1:),.,, ®

for the expression of the total probability, that out of a system
of u balls of which all constitutions are equally probable, r white
balls will issue in p drawings. Now

)

)

n=0 1.2
DY

 

 

    

 

 

Lyreale-1)

neo T

 

  

  

= BBy et
"
(22 e ®

D standing for the symbol dia, co that ¢ (D) o= (n) . But
by a known theorem,

g, A20" aom
oLe A0 TR 1) + Tt =D (-2

 

A+ apailsa0mD +55 D(D-1)+80) (1+ @)

In the second member let ¢ = z, then

2
Dr(l+dpa(saoms Ly 220

 

5*&@)(”:)»,

 

&' T

 

since

 

D(D-1)..(D

 
In the second member of the above equation, performing the differentiationsand making x = 1 (since 0 = 0), we get

                                            2m
Dm (j  ey ^ (m)<^-l  M^LZ ) (A0)2"-* + &c.
          +(mAO+

The last term of the second member of this equation will be <.fa-l)-0.-^l)A-0-
                                                                              ;

y...<<0<-1) „(„..,.)„-,

      mm
since A 0 = 1 . 2.. m. When /i is a large quantity this term exceeds all the

others in value, and as fi approaches to infinity tends to become infinitely
                                                                                    mMm
great in comparison with them. And as moreover it assumes the form p 2",

we have, on passing to the limit,

Z). (1 + £*)" = /u" 2,— = (§)"**.

Hence if ^ (2?) represent any function of the symbol D, which is capable of

being expanded in a series of ascending powers of D, we have

                                                              # (27) (! + .«>-*(!)**. W

if 0 = 0 and /u ■ oo. Strictly speaking, this implies that the ratio of the two

members of the above equation approaches a state of equality, as fi increases

towards infinity, 0 being equal to 0.

By means of this theorem, the last member of (3) reduces to the form

Hence (2) gives

p(p-l)..(p-r+lfl\P


          2
1.2..r V

as the expression for the probability that from an urn containing an infinite

number of black and white balls, all constitutions of the system being equally

probable, r white balls will issue in p drawings.

  Hence, making p = m,r = m, the probability that in m drawings

all the balls will be white is ( - ) , and the probability that this will be the case,

and that moreover the m + 1'* drawing will

      +x
/1Y"

yield a white ball is I - . , whence the probability, that if the

                                                        th
first m drawings yield white balls only, the m + \ drawing will also yield awhite ball, is



  GTMiN'



and generally, any proposed result will have the same probability as if it were

an even chance whether each particular drawing yielded a white or a black

ball. This agrees with the conclusion before obtained.

26. These results only illustrate the fact, that when the defect of data is

supplied by hypothesis, the solutions will, in general, vary with the nature of

the hypotheses assumed; so that the question still remains, only more definite

in form, whether the principles of the theory of probabilities serve to guide us

in the election of such hypotheses. I have already expressed my conviction

that they do not—a conviction strengthened by other reasons than those

above stated. Thus, a definite solution of a problem having been found by the

method of this work, an equally definite solution is sometimes attainable by

the same method when one of the data, suppose Prob. x =^ is omitted. But I

have not been able to discover any mode of deducing the second solution

from the first by integration, with respect to p supposed variable within limits

determined by Chap. xiX. This deduction would, however, I conceive, be

possible, were the principle adverted to in Art. 23 valid. Still it is with

diffidence that I express my dissent on these points from mathematicians

generally, and more especially from one who, of English writers, has most

fully entered into the spirit and the methods of Laplace; and I venture to

hope, that a question, second to none other in the Theory of Probabilities in

importance, will receive the careful attention which it deserves.  CHAPTER XXI.

PARTICULAR APPLICATION OF THB PREVIOUS GENERAL

METHOD TO THE QUESTION OF THE PROBABILITY OF

JUDGMENTS.

1 . /^\N the presumption that the general method of this treatise

^-^ for the solution of questions in the theory of probabilities, has been

sufficiently elucidated in the previous chapters, it is proposed here to enter

upon one of its practical applications selected out of the wide field of social

statistics, viz., the estimation of the probability of judgments. Perhaps this

application, if weighed by its immediate results, is not the best that could

have been chosen. One of the first conclusions to which it leads is that of the

necessary insufficiency of any data that experience alone can furnish, for the

accomplishment of the most important object of the inquiry. But in setting

clearly before us the necessity of hypotheses as supplementary to the data of

experience, and in enabling us to deduce with rigour the consequences of any

hypothesis which may be assumed, the method accomplishes all that properly

lies within its scope. And it may be remarked, that in questions which relate

to the conduct of our own species, hypotheses are more justifiable than in

questions such as those referred to in the concluding sections of the previous

chapter. Our general experience of human nature comes in aid of the

scantiness and imperfection of statistical records.

2. The elements involved in problems relating to criminal assize are the

following:—

1st. The probability that a particular member of the jury will form a correct

opinion upon the case.

2nd. The probability that the accused party is guilty.

3rd. The probability that he will be condemned, or that he will be

acquitted.

4th. The probability that his condemnation or acquittal will be just.

5th. The constitution of the jury.

6th. The data furnished by experience, such as the relative numbers of

cases in which unanimous decisions have been arrived at, or particularmajorities obtained; the number of cases in which decisions have been

reversed by superior courts, &c.

  Again, the class of questions under consideration may be regarded as either

direct or inverse. The direct questions of probability are those in which the

probability of correct decision for each member of the tribunal, or of guilt for

the accused party, are supposed to be known d priori, and in which the

probability of a decision of a particular kind, or with a definite majority, is

sought. Inverse problems are those in which, from the data furnished by

experience, it is required to determine some element which, though it stand to

those data in the relation of cause to effect, cannot directly be made the

subject of observation; as when from the records of the decisions of courts it

is required to determine the probability that a member of a court will judge

correctly. To this species of problems, the most difficult and the most

important of the whole series, attention will chiefly be directed here.

3. There is no difficulty in solving the direct problems referred to in the

above enumeration. Suppose there is but one juryman. Let k be the

probability that the accused person is guilty; x the probability that the

juryman will form a correct opinion; X the probability that the accused person

will be condemned: then—

kx = probability that the accused party is guilty, and that the juryman judges

him to be guilty.

(l-A)(l-a:)= probability that the accused person is innocent, and that the

juryman pronounces him guilty.

Now these being the only cases in which a verdict of condemnation can be

given, and being moreover mutually exclusive,

we have

X = kx + (1 - h) (1 - x). (1)

In like manner, if there be n jurymen whose separate probabilities of

correct judgment are x  x .. xn, the probability of an unanimous verdict of
                        i,i

condemnation will be

X - hXi X2 .. X. + (1 - k) (I - X,) (1 - *,) . . (1 - *„).

Whence, if the several probabilities xx x.. x„ are equal, and are each
                                            i2represented by x, we have

X = kx»+ (\-k) (l-a;)\ (2)

The probability in the latter case, that the accused person is guilty,

will be

hf

kx* + (l-k) (1-x)"'

All these results assume, that the events whose probabilities are denoted by

k, x x,, &c., are independent, an assumption which, however, so far as we are
  i,

concerned, is involved in the fact that those events are the only ones of which

the probabilities are given.

The probability of condemnation by a given number of voices may be

found on the same principles. If a jury is composed of three persons, whose

several probabilities of correct decision are x, x', x", the probability X that the
                                                                                2

accused person will be declared guilty by two of them will be

            '
X - k [xx (1 - x") + xx" (1 - x') + x'x"(l-x)} + (1 - k) {(1 - x) (1 - of) x" + (1
  i

- a;) (1 - x") x'+ (1 - jf) (1 - aT) *},

which if x = x' = x" reduces to

Zkx* (1 - x) + 3 (1 - k) x (1 - x)\

And by the same mode of reasoning, it will appear that if Xi represent the

probability that the accused person will be declared guilty by i voices out of a

jury consisting of n persons, whose separate probabilities of correct judgment

are equal, and represented by x, then

                          +1
3T< ° * ^" ~^ . . (** 7») {fai (! _ j.)—t + (i - *)x—«(1 -»y}. (3)

If the probability of condemnation by a determinate majority a is required,

we have simply

i - a = n - i,

whence

. n + awhich must be substituted in the above formula. Of course a admits only of

such values as make i an integer. If n is even, those values are 0, 2, 4, &c.; if

odd, \,3, 5, &c., as is otherwise obvious.

The probability of a condemnation by a majority of at least a given number

of voices m, will be found by adding together the following several

probabilities determined as above, viz.:

1st. The probability of a condemnation by an exact majority m',

2nd. The probability of condemnation by the next greater majority m + 2;

and so on; the last element of the series being the probability of unanimous

condemnation. Thus the probability of condemnation by a majority of 4 at

least out of 12 jurors, would be

the values of the above terms being given by (3) after making therein n = 12.

4. When, instead of a jury, we are considering the case of a simple

deliberative assembly consisting of n persons, whose separate probabilities of

correct judgment are denoted by x, the above formule are replaced by others,

made somewhat more simple by the omission of the quantity A.

The probability of unanimous decision is

                  n
X m af + (1 - x).

The probability of an agreement of i voices out of the whole number is


x= »(»-!). -("-^O^Q.^^Md.^,

Of this class of investigations it is unnecessary to give any further account.

They have been pursued to a considerable extent by Condorcet, Laplace,

Poisson, and other writers, who have investigated in particular the modes of

calculation and reduction which are necessary to be employed when n and i

are large numbers. It is apparent that the whole inquiry is of a very

speculative character. The values of x and k cannot be determined by direct

observation. We can only presume that they

must both in general exceed the value -; that the former, x, must

increase with the progress of public intelligence; while the latter, k, must

depend much upon those preliminary steps in the administration of the law bywhich persons suspected of crime are brought before the tribunal of their

country. It has been remarked by Poisson, that in periods of revolution, as

during the Reign of Terror in France, the value of k may fall, if account be

taken of political offences, far below the limit -. The history of

Europe in days nearer to our own would probably confirm this observation,

and would show that it is not from the wild license of democracy alone, that

the accusation of innocence is to be apprehended.

  Laplace makes the assumption, that all values of x from

*=-, to x= 1,

are equally probable. He thus excludes the supposition that a juryman is more

likely to be deceived than not, but assumes that within the limits to which the

probabilities of individual correctness of judgment are confined, we have no

reason to give preference to one value of x over another. This hypothesis is

entirely arbitrary, and it would be unavailing here to examine into its

consequences.

  Poisson seems first to have endeavoured to deduce the values of x and k,

inferentially, from experience. In the six years from 1825 to 1830 inclusively,

the number of individuals accused of crimes against the person before the

tribunals of France was 11016, and the number of persons condemned was

5286. The juries consisted each of 12 persons, and the decision was

pronounced by a simple majority. Assuming the above numbers to be

sufficiently large for the estimation of probabilities, there

  5286 would therefore be a probability measured by the fraction r-.Trr^i

or .4782 that an accused person would be condemned by a simple majority.

We should have the equation

X + X.. + X- .4782, (5) the general expression for X being given by (3)
  72ut

after making therein n = 12. In the year 1831 the law, having received

alteration, required a majority of at least four persons for condemnation, and

the number of persons tried for crimes against the person during that year

being 2046, and the number condemned 743, the probability of the

condemnation of an individual by the

  743 above majority was S^TT* or .3631. Hence we should haveX + X, . .. + X-.8631. (6)
  su

  Assuming that the values of k and x were the same for the year 1831 as for

the previous six years, the two equations (5) and (6) enable us to determine

approximately their values. Poisson thus found,

k = .5354, x = .6786.

For crimes against property during the same periods, he found by a similar

analysis,

A = .6744, # = .7771.

The solution of the system (5) (6) conducts in each case to two values of k,

and to two values of x, the one value in each

pair being'greater, and the other less, than -. It was assumed,

that in each case the larger value should be preferred, it being conceived more

probable that a party accused should be guilty than innocent, and more
                                  (

probable that a juryman should form a correct than an erroneous opinion

upon the evidence.,

5. The data employed by Poisson, especially those which were furnished

by the year 1831, are evidently too imperfect to permit us to attach much

confidence to the above determinations of x and k; and it is chiefly for the

sake of the method that they are here introduced. It would have been possible

to record during the six years, 1825-30, or during any similar period, the

number of condemnations pronounced with each possible majority of voices.

The values of the several elements X, X .. Xu, were there no reasons of
                                          eii

policy to forbid, might have been accurately ascertained. Here then the

conception of the general problem, of which Poisson's is a particular case,

arises. How shall we, from this apparently supernumerary system of data,

determine the values of x and k? If the hypothesis, adopted by Poisson and all

other writers on the subject, of the absolute independence of the events whose

probabilities are denoted by x and k be retained, we should be led to form a

system of five equations of the type (3), and either select from these that

particular pair of equations which might appear to be most advantageous, or

combine together the equations of the system by the method of least squares.

There might exist a doubt as to whether the latter method would be strictly

applicable in such cases, especially if the values of x and k afforded bydifferent selected pairs of the given equations were very different from each

other. M. Cournot has considered a somewhat similar problem, in which,

from the records of individual votes in a court consisting of four judges, it is

proposed to investigate the separate probabilities of a correct verdict from

each judge. For the determination of the elements x, x, x", x", he obtains eight

equations, which he divides into two sets of four equations, and he remarks,

that should any considerable discrepancy exist between the values of x, af, x",

x", determined from those sets, it might be regarded as an indication that the

hypothesis of the independence of the opinions of the judges was, in the

particular case, untenable. The principle of this mode of investigation has

been adverted to in (XVIII. 4).

6. I proceed to apply to the class of problems above indicated, the method

of this treatise, and shall inquire, first, whether the records of courts and

deliberative assemblies, alone, can furnish any information respecting the

probabilities of correct judgment for their individual members, and, it

appearing that they cannot, secondly, what kind and amount of necessary

hypothesis will best comport with the actual data.

  PROPOSITION I.

  From the mere records of the decisions of a court or deliberative assembly,

it is not possible to deduce any definite conclusion respecting the correctness

of the individual judgments of its members.

  Though this Proposition may appear to express but the conviction of

unassisted good sense, it will not be without interest to show that it admits of

rigorous demonstration.

Let us suppose the case of a deliberative assembly consisting of n

members, no hypothesis whatever being made respecting the dependence or

independence of their judgments. Let the logical symbols xx x2, . . x„ be
                                                                      i

employed according to the following definition, viz.: Let the generic symbol

Xi denote that event which consists in the uttering of a correct opinion by the
h
if member, A> of the court. We shall consider the values of Prob. Xi, Prob.

x2, . . Prob. x, as the quasita of a problem, the expression of whose possible
              n

data we must in the next place investigate.

Now those data are the probabilities of events capable of being expressed

by definite logical functions of the symbols x, x„ .. x. Let X, X„ .. X
                                                    xKxmrepresent the functions in question, and let the actual system of data be

Prob. X = a,, Prob. X = a Prob. X = a*.
          x22u

Then from the very nature of the case it may be shown that X .X2, . . X, are
                                                                        iim

functions which remain unchanged if x  a;„ . . x are therein changed into 1 -
                                            i,n

xx, 1 - x, .. 1 - x respectively. Thus, if it were recorded that in a certain
        2n

proportion of instances the votes given were unanimous, the event whose

probability, supposing the instances sufficiently numerous, is thence

determined, is expressed by the logical function

xx x. . x + (1 - a;,) (1 -«,).. (1 - x),
  inn

a function which satisfies the above condition. Again, let it be recorded, that

in a certain proportion of instances, the vote of an individual, suppose A ,
                                                                                    i

differs from that of all the other members of the court. The event, whose

probability is thus given, will be expressed by the function

Xi (1 - Xi) . . (1 - xn) + (1 - x^ x . . x;
                                      2n

also satisfying the above conditions. Thus, as agreement in opinion may be

an agreement in either truth or error; and as, when opinions are divided,

either party may be right or wrong; it is manifest that the expression of any

particular state, whether of agreement or difference of sentiment in the

assembly, will depend upon a logical function of the symbols xx x, . . x,
                                                                          tin

which similarly involves the privative symbols 1 -a:,, 1 — x,, .. 1 - x. But in
                                                                                n

the records of assemblies, it is not presumed to declare which set of opinions

is right or wrong. Hence the functions X  X,.. X must be solely of the kind
                                              i,zm

above described.

7. Now in proceeding, according to the general method, to determine the

value of Prob. x we should first equate the functions Xi, .. X to a new set of
                i,m

symbols < . . t. From the equations
          ,im

JLi = ti, A2 = t . . X = t,
                  2,mm

thus formed, we should eliminate the symbols x2, x,, .. x, and then determine
                                                                  n

a;, as a developed logical function of the symbols t  h, . . t, expressive of
                                                          i,m

events whose probabilities are given. Let the result of the above elimination

beEx, + E (1 - a;,) = 0; (1)

E and E' being function of t, t2, .. t. Then
                              xm

E






                                                                                        (2)



Now the functions X X, . . X are symmetrical with reference to the
                          i,2m

symbols x  . . x„ and 1 - xx .. 1— x„. It is evident, therefore, that in the
          i,,

equation E must be identical with E.

Hence (2) gives

E

x = —,

0'

and it is evident, that the only coefficients which can appear in the

development of the second member of the above equation are

- and -. The former will present itself whenever the values

assigned to t,.. t in determining the coefficient of a constituent, are such as to
            xm

make E = 0, the latter, or an equivalent result, in every other case. Hence we

may represent the development under the form

                                                                            "= 0-^5^ (3)

C and D being constituents, or aggregates of constituents, of the symbols <,,

t . . tm.
u

  Passing then from Logic to Algebra, we have

  Prob.z, =-^ = c,

the function V of the general Rule (XVII. 17) reducing in the present case to

C. The value of Prob. x^ is therefore wholly arbitrary, if we except thecondition that it must not transcend the limits 0 and 1. The individual values

of Prob. x„,.. Prob.a;, are in like manner arbitrary. It does not hence follow,
                      m

that these arbitrary values are not connected with each other by necessary

conditions dependent upon the data. The investigation of such conditions

would, however, properly fall under the methods of Chap. xiX.

If, reverting to the final logical equation, we seek the interpretation of c,

we obtain but a restatement of the original problem. For since C and D

together include all possible constituents of t,, r„ . . t, we have
                                                            m

6' + D = 1;

and since D is affected by the coefficient -, it is evident that on

substituting therein for <x, t, . . t, their expressions in terms of xx, x,.. x, we
                                2m2n

should have D= 0. Hence the same substitution would give C= 1. Now by the

rule, c is the probability that if the event denoted by C take place, the event x
                                                                                          x

will take place. Hence C being equal to 1, and, therefore, embracing all

possible contingencies, c must be interpreted as the absolute probability of

the occurrence of the event a:,.

It may be interesting to determine in a particular case the actual form of the

final logical equation. Suppose, then, that the elements from which the data

are derived are the records of events distinct and mutually exclusive. For

instance, let the numerical data a,, a, .. a, be the respective probabilities of
                                        zm

distinct and definite majorities. Then the logical functions Zi, X . . X being
                                                                          um

mutually exclusive, must satisfy the conditions

                  r
X, X = 0, .. A, X = 0, X Xm = 0, &c. Whence we have,
      2m2

U «, = 0, U t = 0, &c. Under these circumstances it may easily be shown,
                m

that the developed logical value of x will be
                                        x

0 _ _ .

+ constituents whose coefScients are -.

In the above equation 7i stands for 1 - t &c
                                            i,

  These investigations are equally applicable to the case in which the

probabilities of the verdicts of a jury, so far as agreement and disagreement of

opinion are concerned, form the data of a problem. Let the logical symbol wdenote that event or state of things which consists in the guilt of the accused

person. Then the functions X X . . X of the present problem are such, that no
                                i,2m

change would therein ensue from simultaneously converting w, xx x . . x into
                                                                              t2n

lb, x x, . . x respectively. Hence the final logical value of w, as well as those
  2,2n

of x a;2, .. x will be exhibited under the same form (3), and a like general
  Mm

conclusion thence deduced.

It is therefore established, that from mere statistical documents nothing can

be inferred respecting either the individual correctness of opinion of a judge

or counsellor, the guilt of an individual, or the merits of a disputed question.

If the determination of such elements as the above can be reduced within the

province of science at all, it must be by virtue either of some assumed

criterion of truth furnishing us with new data, or of some hypothesis relative

to the connexion or the independence of individual judgments, which may

warrant a new form of the investigation. In the examination of the results of

different hypotheses, the following general Proposition will be of importance.

  PROPOSITION II.

8. Given the probabilities of the n simple events x, x, . . jr., viz.:—
                                                            ii

Prob. x = c,, Prob. x = c, . . Prob. x„ = c; (1)
          x22n

also the probabilities of the m-l compound events X, X«,. . A',,.,, viz.:—
                                                            i

          r
Prob. A, = a,, Prob. X, = a, . . Prob. X„., = am.; (2)the latter events X ..
                                2il

X.i being distinct and mutually exclusive; required the probability of any
m

other compound event A.

In this proposition it is supposed, that Xi, X2 , .. X.i, as well as X, are
                                                            m

functions of the symbols x x, . . x alone. Moreover, the events A,, A,.. A„
                              i,2n2mM

being mutually exclusive, we have

X, A, = 0, . . Xi A. = 0, A, X, = 0, &c.; (3)
                      m;

the product of any two members of the system vanishing. Now

assume

Ai = £l, X-i ~ tm-il X = t. (4)
            m

Then < must be determined as a logical function of a;,, . . x,
                                                                    n2l, • • *m -l •

Now by (3),

<i t2 = 0, *, f, = 0, h t = 0, &c.; (5)
                m.2

all binary products of ti , .. <m-n vanishing. The developed expression for t

can, therefore, only involve in the list of constituents which have 1, 0, or -

.for their coefficients, such as contain some' one of the following factors, viz.:

—

TiU • . T.t, tTt • .7i, •• S •• tm-ttm-ll (6)
            mlm.

t standing for I - <,, &c It remains to assign that portion of each constituent
t

which involves the symbols x.. x; together with the corresponding
                                  ln

coefficients.

  Since Xi = t (i being any integer between 1 and m - 1 inclusive), it is
              {

evident that

Aj ti .. t.i = 0,
          m

from the very constitution of the functions. Any constituent included in the

first member of the above equation would, therefore, have - for its

coefficient.

Now let

A„ = 1-A..-AV; (7)
            ll

and it is evident that such constituents as involve F,. . r-i, as
                                                                ui

a factor, and yet have coefficients of the form 1, 0, or -,must be included in

the expression determine a, as a function of c,.. c„, a.. am_„ the numerical
                              m.k

data supposed to be furnished by experience. We now proceed to their

application.

Now X may be resolved into two portions, viz., XX* and (1 - X) X, the
      mm

former being the sum of those constituents of X which are found in X, the
                                                      m

latter of those which are not found in X. It is evident that in the developed

expression off, which is equivalent to X, the coefficients of the constituents in

the former portion XX will be 1, while those of the latter portion (1 - X) X
                        mm

will be 0. Hence the elements we have now considered will contribute to thedevelopment of t the terms

XX ti .. 7m.i + 0(1- X) X ti .. 7_i.
    mmM

  Again, since Xi = t, while X, t = <,<,= 0, &c., it is evident that the only
                      xi

constituents involving t 7.. 7M.i as a factor which
                          x2

have coefficients of the form 1, 0, or -, will be included in the expression

X\ t2 r.. t.i;
        2m

and reasoning as before, we see that this will contribute to the development

of t the terms

  XXitJi . . 7, + 0(l-X)X£? ..?m.,.
              m.1ia

  Proceeding thus with the remaining terms of (6), we deduce for the final

expression of t,

t = XX t\ . . t.l + XXiti t2 . . £i . . + XX-i ti . . C-i tm-i
      mmm.mm

+ 0 (1 - X) X7,.. 7... + 0 (1 -X)XtT,.. 7,., + &c. (8) + terms whose
              mxx

coefficients are -.

In this expression it is to be noted that XX denotes the sum of those
                                                  m

constituents which are common to X and X, that sum being actually given by
                                                  m

multiply ingX and X together, according to the rules of the calculus of
                      m

Logic.

In passing from Logic to Algebra, we shall represent by (XXm) what the

above product becomes, when, after effecting the multiplication, or selecting

the common constituents, we give to the symbols a;,, . . x„, a quantitative

meaning.‘With this understanding we shall have, by the general Rule

(XVIL17),
Prob.¢

(XX ’.ﬁ(xx.):‘fv- ot (XXn ) L ®

VaXatioolart Xiti Goo Tny o4 X Biec Tacg o (10)

whence the relations determining z,, . . zay fis - - tu-s will be of
the following type (i varying from 1 to ),
@ X )T

   

 

    

From the above system we shall next climinate the symbols

by tae

 

 

 

We have
4t (12)
Substituting these values in (10), we find
VeXufio TartaV. .+ am
Hence,
B taa =
Now let
Q=180 = Gn,y 13)
then we have =
an
b= 149

Now reducing, by means of (12) and (14), the equation (9),
and the equation formed by equating the first line of (11) to the
eymbol V' writing also Prob. X for Prob. &, we have

a(XX) | @ (XX)
e

Prob. X- ”#_x'), (15)

 

 
 

(#: Xu)

e (16)

wherein X and an are given by (7) and (13).
  These equations involve the direct solution of the problem under

consideration. In (16) we have the type of n equations (formed by giving to i

the values 1, 2, .. » successively), from which the values of xx x ,.x will be
                                                                        iz,ni

found, and those values substituted in (15) give the value of Prob. X as afunction of the constants a,, c,, &c.

One conclusion deserving of notice, which is deducible from the above

solution, is, that if the probabilities of the compound events X,, . . X., are the
                                                                                mi

same as they would be were the events x,, .. x entirely independent, and with
                                                    n

given probabilities c,, .. c„, then the probability of the event X will be the

same as if calculated upon the same hypothesis of the absolute independence

of the events Xi, .. x. For upon the hypothesis supposed, the assumption x =
                      ux

c,, x = c„, in the quantitative system would give Xi = a X = a, whence (15)
    ni,mm

and (16) would give

Prob. X = (XX,) + (XX) .. + (XX), (17)
                            Sm

(x X,) + (*, X) . . + (Xi X) = . (18)
    t2mci

But since Xi + X.. + X - 1, it is evident that the second member of (17)
                    im

will be formed by taking all the constituents that are contained in X, and

giving them an algebraic significance. And a similar remark applies to (18).

Whence those equations respectively give

Prob. X (logical) = X (algebraic), xi = a. Wherefore, if X = 0 («,, x, .. ««),
                                                                                2

we have Prob. X = <p (c, , c, .. c), which is the result in question.
                                2

  Hence too it would follow, that if the quantities c,. . c were indeterminate,
                                                            iu

and no hypothesis were made as to the possession of a mean common value,

the system (15) (16) would be satisfied by giving to those quantities any such

values, Xi, x, . - x„, as would satisfy the equations
            2

  rr
A, = a, . . !m., = am.i, A = a, supposing the value of the element a, like the

values ofai,.. a.,, to be given by experience.
                m

9. Before applying the general solution (15) (16), to the question of the

probability of judgments, it will be convenient to make the following

transformation. Let the data be

x\ = ci .... x = c, namely,
            nn

Prob. Xi = a, .... Prob. X. = a-2;
                              m2m

and let it be required to determine Prob. A'.,, the unknown value of which we
                                                m

will represent by a.,. Then in (15) and (16) we must change
                    mX into X., Prob. X into am.),
          mt

X-i into X.2, am.i into a..
    mmm2

X into I„.i + X, a into a. + a*;
    mmmml

with these transformations, and observing that (X„,., X) = 0, except when r =
                                                                r

m - 1, and that it is then equal to Xm.,, the equations (15) (16) give

ci

a^xtXi) a„-,(xX.) (a,., + a) (x X.2 + x X)
                im2mtmtm

      +
Y "' X Y -L Y "^'

Now from (19) we find

A-, _ X ^ X.\ + A
    Mmmm

  «>n-i »m a„.i + a
                      m

by virtue of which the last term of (20) may be reduced to the form


    «m-i (xX.) a(xX) 
              imlmtm

    X.\ A 
        mM


With these reductions the system (17) and (18) may be replaced by the

following symmetrical one, viz.:

v v







@n

(22)

 

These equations, in connexion with (7

 

ad (13), enable us to
  PROPOSITION III.

10. Given any system of probabilities dravm from recorded instances of

unanimity, or of assigned numerical majority in the decisions of a

deliberative assembly; required, upon a certain determinate hypothesis, the

mean probability of correct judgment for a member of the assembly.

In what way the probabilities of unanimous decision and of specific

numerical majorities may be determined from experience, has been intimatedin a former part of this chapter. Adopting the notation of Prop. I. we shall

represent the events whose probabilities are given by the functions X X$,..
                                                                                i,

X,. It has appeared from the very nature of the case that these events are
m.

mutually exclusive, and that the functions by which they are represented are

symmetrical with reference to the symbols x„x. .x. Those symbols we
                                                      nn

continue to use in the same sense as in Prop. I., viz., by xi we understand that

event which consists in the formation of a correct opinion by the »'* member

of the assembly.

Now the immediate data of experience are—

                                              r
Prob. -Xi=a,, Prob. X = a2, . . Prob. A, = a., (1)
                          3m.m2

                                                                  Prob. AV, = am-i. (2)

A'i.. X., being functions of the logical symbols x„ .. x„ to the probabilities of
      a

the events denoted by which, we shall assign the indeterminate value c. Thus

we shall have

Prob. a;, = Prob. x,.. = Prob. x = c. (3)
                                    „

Now it has been seen, Prop, i., that the immediate, data(l) (2), unassisted

by any hypothesis, merely conduct us to a restatement of the problem. On the

other hand, it is manifest that if, adopting the methods of Laplace and

Poisson, we employ the system (3) alone as the data for the application of the

method of this work, finally comparing the results obtained with the

experimental system (1) (2), we are relying wholly upon a doubtful

hypothesis,—the independence of individual judgments. But though we

ought not wholly to rely upon this hypothesis, we cannot wholly dispense

with it, or with some equivalent substitute. Let us then examine the

consequences of a limited independence of the individual judgments; the

conditions of limitation being furnished by the apparently superfluous data.

From the system (1) (3) let us, by the method of this work, determine Prob.

X.x, and, comparing the result with (2), determine c. Even here an arbitrary
m

power of selection is claimed. But it is manifest from Prop. I. that something

of this kind is unavoidable, if we would obtain a definite solution at all. As to

the principle of selection, I apprehend that the equation (2) reserved for final

comparison should be that which, from the magnitude of its numerical

element am.i, is esteemed the most important of the primary series furnished

by experience.Now, from the mutually exclusive character of the events denoted by the

functions X  X,.. A".i, the concluding equations of the previous proposition
            i,2m

become applicable. On account of the symmetry of the same functions, and

the reduction of the system of values denoted by cj to a single value c, the

equations represented by (22) become identical, the values of x, x?,. ,x
                                                                          i%

become equal, and may be replaced by a single value x, and we have simply,

X.i Am .
  m

        4
= —, ()

a., a
mm

a, (xX,) a(xX) a (x X) _
        22mm

                  +c
  ~~xT~*~xT~ x ~- W
                      m

The following is the nature of the solution thus indicated:

The functions X.. X. and the values ax.. a., being given in the data, we
                    um2,mi

have first,


    X = 1 - Ai..- X.i, 
      mm

    a = 1 - a,.. - am.,. 
      m


  From each of the functions X, X, . . X thus given or determined, we must
                                    i2m

select those constituents which contain a particular symbol, as xx for a factor.
                                                                            i

This will determine the functions (xXi), (xX), &c, and then in all the
                                                  2

functions we must change xx x,.. x individually to x. Or we may regard any
                                i2n

algebraic function Xj in the system (4) (5) as expressing the probability of the

event denoted by the logical function A'j, on the supposition that the logical

symbols xx x2,. .x denote independent events whose common probability is
            in

x. On the same supposition (xX) would denote the probability of the
                                  t

concurrence of any particular event of the series xx x,.. x with A',. The forms
                                                          i2n

of Xi, (xXi), &c. being determined, the equation (4) gives the value of x, and

this, substituted in (5), determines the value of the element c required. Of the

two values which its solution will offer, one being greater, and the other less,

than £, the greater one must be chosen, whensoever, upon general

considerations, it is thought more probable that a member of the assemblywill judge correctly, than that he will judge incorrectly.

Here then, upon the assumed principle that the largest of the values a.
                                                                                    mi

shall be reserved for final comparison in the equation (2), we possess a

definite solution of the problem proposed. And the same form of solution

remains applicable should any other equation of the system, upon any other

ground, as that of superior accuracy, be similarly reserved in the place of (2).

11. Let us examine to what extent the above reservation has influenced the

final solution. It is evident that the equation (5) is quite independent of the

choice in question. So is likewise the second member of (4). Had we reserved

the function X„ instead of A.,, the equation for the determination of a; would
                                m

have been

                                                                                  ^-^i (6)

but the value of x thence determined would still have to be substituted in the

same final equation (5). We know that were the events x„ x . . x really
                                                                    iin

independent, the equations (4), (6), and all others of which they are types,

would prove equivalent, and that the value of x furnished by any one of them

would be the true value of c. This affords a means of verifying (5). For if that

equation be correct, it ought, under the above circumstances, to be satisfied

by the assumption c = x. In other words, the equation

a, (a:X,) a,(xX,) a(xX) _
                  mm

                        x{i)
~JcT A, . . ~~x ~ 
                    m

ought, on solution, to give the same value of X as the equation (4) or (6).

Now this will be the case. For since, by hypothesis,


    Xi X* _ --*.» 

    a, a," a' 
            m


we have, by a known theorem,


    X\ _ -A, _ Xm A, + A2.. + X 
                                      m

    a, a, * a a, + a, .. + a 
              mm


Hence (7) becomes on substituting a for X &c.
                                          xu(xX) + (xX)..+ (zXj-x a mere identity.
    i2

  Whenever, therefore, the events x x,,.. x are really independent, the system
                                          un

(4) (5) is a correct one, and is independent of the arbitrariness of the first step

of the process by which it was obtained. When the said events are not

independent, the final system of equations will possess, leaving in abeyance

the principle of selection above stated, an arbitrary element. But from the

persistent form of the equation (5) it may be inferred that the solution is

arbitrary in a less degree than the solutions to which the hypothesis of the

absolute independence of the individual judgments would conduct us. The

discussion of the limits of the value of c, as dependent upon the limits of the

value of a:, would determine such points.

  These considerations suggest to us the question whether the equation (7),

which is symmetrical with reference to the functions Xu X„ .. X, free from
                                                                          m

any arbitrary elements, and rigorously exact when the events x» X?,.. x are
                                                                                  n

really independent, might not be accepted as a mean general solution of the

problem. The proper mode of determining this point would, I conceive, be to

ascertain whether the value of a; which it would afford would, in general, fall

within the limits of the value of c, as determined by the systems of equations

of which the system (4), (5), presents the type. It seems probable that under

ordinary circumstances this would be the case. Independently of such

considerations, however, we may regard (7) as itself the expression of a

certain principle of solution, viz., that regarding „Y„ X,. . A' as exclusive
                                                                2m

causes of the event whose probability is x, we accept the probabilities of

those causes a„ .. a from experience, but form the conditional probabilities of
                    m

the event as dependent upon such causes,

&>, &,&c. (XVII. Prop. I.)

on the hypothesis of the independence of individual judgments, and so

deduce the equation (7). I conceive this, however, to be a less rigorous,

though possibly, in practice a more convenient mode of procedure than that

adopted in the general solution.

12. It now only remains to assign the particular forms which the algebraic

functions Xi, (xXi), &c. in the above equations assume when the logical

function Xi represents that event which consists in r members of the assembly

voting one way, and n-r members the other way. It is evident that in this casethe algebraic function Xi expresses what the probability of the supposed event

would be were the events x„ x,.. x independent, and their common
                                  2n

probability measured by x. Hence we should have, by Art. 3,


    , M(«- 1).. (n-r + 1) , . ., . . 
    r
      Xi{X+(lX)
    " 1.2..r    ~ '. 


Under the same circumstances (xXi) would represent the probability of the

compound event, which consists in a particular member of the assembly

forming a correct judgment, conjointly with the general state of voting

recorded above. It would, therefore, be the probability that a particular

member votes correctly, while of the remaining » - 1 members, r - l vote

correctly; or that the same member votes correctly, while of the remaining n -

1 members r vote incorrectly. Hence

                                                XJL+
lrX\ ("-l)("-2).-(»-r + l) (»-l)(»-2)..(»-r)_ (0~ l.2..r-l  1 .2..r *'

  PROPOSITION IV.

13. Given any system of probabilities draxonfrom recorded instances of

unanimity, or of assigned numerical majority in the decisions of a criminal

court of justice, required upon hypotheses similar to those of the last

proposition, the mean probability c of correct judgment for a member of the

court, and the general probability k of guilt in an accused person.

The solution of this problem differs in but a slight degree from that of the

last, and may be referred to the same general formulae, (4) and (5), or (7). It

is to be observed, that as there are two elements, c and k, to be determined, it

is necessary to reserve two of the functions Xu X%,.. X. let us suppose X,,
                                                                mu

and Xm.u for final comparison, employing either the remaining TO - 3

functions in the expression of the data, or the two respective sets X, X,.. X.u
                                                                              22m

and Xu X„ ... X.. In either case it is supposed that there must be at least two
                mi

original independent data. If the equation (7) be alone employed, it would in

the present instance furnish two equations, which may thus be written:

    r
a,(xA.) a(xX,) a (xX) _
          imm

          +
~XT x . . ~^r *" <V
    zn


a,(AX,) a,(*X2) am(kXm)        ++k
~xT  ~xT~" x ~- V>
                      m

                                                                                -
These equations are to be employed in the following manner:— Let a,, a;,..
                                                                                      2

x„ represent those events which consist in the formation of a correct opinion

by the members of the court respectively. Let also w represent that event

which consists in the guilt of the accused member. By the aid of these

symbols we can logically express the functions Xu Xi,.. X. whose
                                                                  mu

probabilities are given, as ajso the function X. Then from the function Xi
                                                    m

select those constituents which contain, as a factor, any particular symbol of

the set xx x ..x, and also those constituents which contain as a factor w. In
        inn

both results change z„ X2, .. x severally into x, and w into fi. The above
                                  n

results will give (xX,) and (AX,). Effecting the same transformations

throughout, the system (1), (2) will, upon the particular hypothesis involved,

determine x and k.

14. We may collect from the above investigations the following facts and

conclusions:

1st. That from the mere records of agreement and disagreement in the

opinions of any body of men, no definite numerical conclusions can be drawn

respecting either the probability of correct judgment in an individual member

of the body, or the merit of the questions submitted to its consideration.

2nd. That such conclusions may be drawn upon various distinct

hypotheses, as—1st, Upon the usual hypothesis of the absolute independence

of individual judgments; 2ndly, upon certain definite modifications of that

hypothesis warranted by the actual data; 3rdly, upon a distinct principle of

solution suggested by the appearance of a common form in the solutions

obtained by the modifications above adverted to.

  Lastly. That whatever of doubt may attach to the final results, rests not

upon the imperfection of the method, which adapts itself equally to all

hypotheses, but upon the uncertainty of the hypotheses themselves.

It seems, however, probable that with even the widest limits of hypothesis,

consistent with the taking into account of all the data of experience, the

deviation of the results obtained would be but slight, and that their mean

values might be determined with great confidence by the methods of Prop. m.

Of those methods I should be disposed to give the preference to the first.

Such a principle of mean solution having been agreed upon, otherconsiderations seem to indicate that the values of c and k for tribunals and

assemblies possessing a definite constitution, and governed in their

deliberations by fixed rules, would remain nearly constant, subject, however,

to a small secular variation, dependent upon the progress of knowledge and

of justice among mankind. There exist at present few, if any, data proper for

their determination.  CHAPTER XXII.

ON THE NATURE OF SCIENCE, AND THE CONSTITUTION OF THE

INTELLECT.

1 • TT THAT I mean by the constitution of a system is the '' aggregate of

those causes and tendencies which produce its observed character, when

operating, without interference, under those conditions to which the system is

conceived to be adapted. Our judgment of such adaptation must be founded

upon a study of the circumstances in which the system attains its freest

action, produces its most harmonious results, or fulfils in some other way the

apparent design of its construction. There are cases in which we know

distinctly the causes upon which the operation of a system depends, as well

as its conditions and its end. This is the most perfect kind of knowledge

relatively to the subject under consideration. There are also cases in which we

know only imperfectly or partially the causes which are at work, but are able,

nevertheless, to determine to some extent the laws of their action, and,

beyond this, to discover general tendencies, and to infer ulterior purpose. It

has thus, I think rightly, been concluded that there is a moral faculty in our

nature, not because we can understand the special instruments by which it

works, as we connect the organ with the faculty of sight, nor upon the ground

that men agree in the adoption of universal rules of conduct; but because

while, in some form or other, the sentiment of moral approbation or

disapprobation manifests itself in all, it tends, wherever human progress is

observable, wherever society is not either stationary or hastening to decay, to

attach itself to certain classes of actions, consentaneously, and after a manner

indicative both of permanency and of law. Always and everywhere the

manifestation of Order affords a presumption, not measurable indeed, but real

(XX. 22), of the fulfilment of an end or purpose, and the existence of a

ground of orderly causation.

2. The particular question of the constitution of the intellect has, it is

almost needless to say, attracted the efforts of speculative ingenuity in every

age. For it not only addresses itself to that desire of knowledge which the

greatest masters of ancient thought believed to be innate in our species, but it

adds to the ordinary strength of this motive the inducement of a human and

personal interest. A genuine devotion to truth is, indeed, seldom partial in its

aims, but while it prompts to expatiate over the fair fields of outward

observation, forbids to neglect the study of our own faculties. Even in agesthe most devoted to material interests, some portion of the current of thought

has been reflected inwards, and the desire to comprehend that by which all

else is comprehended has only been baffled in order to be renewed.

It is probable that this pertinacity of effort would not have been maintained

among sincere inquirers after truth, had the conviction been general that such

speculations are hopelessly barren. We may conceive that it has been felt that

if something of error and uncertainty, always incidental to a state of partial

information, must ever be attached to the results of such inquiries, a residue

of positive knowledge may yet remain; that the contradictions which are met

with are more often verbal than real; above all, that even probable

conclusions derive here an interest and a value from their subject, which

render them not unworthy to claim regard beside the more definite and more

splendid results of physical science. Such considerations seem to be perfectly

legitimate. Insoluble as many of the problems connected with the inquiry into

the nature and constitution of the mind must be presumed to be, there are not

wanting others upon which a limited but not doubtful knowledge, others upon

which the conclusions of a highly probable analogy, are attainable. As the

realms of day and night are not strictly conterminous, but are separated by a

crepuscular zone, through which the light of the one fades gradually off into

the darkness of the other, so it may be said that every region of positive

knowledge lies surrounded by a debateable and speculative territory, over

which it in some degree extends its influence and its light. Thus there may be

questions relating to the constitution of the intellect which, though they do

not admit, in the present state of know

ledge, of an absolute decision, may receive so much of reflected information

as to render their probable solution not difficult; and there may also be

questions relating to the nature of science, and even to particular truths and

doctrines of science, upon which they who accept the general principles of

this work cannot but be led to entertain positive opinions, differing, it may

be, from those which are usually received in the present day.* In what

follows I shall recapitulate some of the more definite conclusions established

in the former parts of this treatise, and shall then indicate one or two trains of

thought, connected with the general objects above adverted to, which they

seem to me calculated to suggest.

3. Among those conclusions, relating to the intellectual constitution, which

may be considered as belonging to the realm of positive knowledge, we mayreckon the scientific laws of thought and reasoning, which have formed the

basis of the general methods of this treatise, together with the principles,

Chap. V., by which their application has been determined. The resolution of

the domain of thought into two spheres, distinct but coexistent (IV. XI.); the

subjection of the intellectual operations within those spheres to a common

system of laws (XL); the general mathematical character of those laws, and

their actual expression (II. III.) ; the extent of their affinity with the laws of

thought in the domain of number, and the point of their divergence therefrom

; the dominant character of the two limiting conceptions of universe and

eternity among all the subjects of thought with which Logic is concerned; the

relation of those conceptions to the fundamental conception of unity in the

science of number,— these, with many similar results, are not to be ranked as

merely probable or analogical conclusions, but arc entitled to be regarded as

truths of science. Whether they be termed metaphysical or not, is a matter of

indifference. The nature of the evidence upon which they rest, though in kind

distinct, is not inferior in value to any which can be adduced in support of the

general truths of physical science.

      "The following illustration may suffice:—

      It is maintained by some of the highest modern authorities in grammar

    that conjunctions connect propositions only. Now, without inquiring

    directly whether this opinion is sound or not, it is obvious that it cannot

    consistently beheld by any who admit the scientific principles of this

    treatise; for to such it would seem to involve a denial, either, 1st, of the

    possibility of performing, or 2ndly, of the possibility of expressing, a

    mental operation, the laws of which, viewed in

    both these relations, have been investigated and applied in the present

    work

    (Latham on the English Language; Sir John Stoddart's Universal

    Grammar, &c.)

  Again, it is agreed that there is a certain order observable in the progress of

all the exacter forms of knowledge. The study of every department of

physical science begins with observation, it advances by the collation of facts

to a presumptive acquaintance with their connecting law, the validity of such

presumption it tests by new experiments so devised as to augment, if the

presumption be well founded, its probability indefinitely; and finally, the lawof the phenomenon having been with sufficient confidence determined, the

investigation of causes, conducted by the due mixture of hypothesis and

deduction, crowns the inquiry. In this advancing order of knowledge, the

particular faculties and laws whose nature has been considered in this work

bear their part. It is evident, therefore, that if we would impartially investigate

either the nature of science, or the intellectual constitution in its relation to

science, no part of the two series above presented ought to be regarded as

isolated. More especially ought those truths which stand in any kind of

supplemental relation to each other to be considered in their mu- . tual

bearing and connexion.

4. Thus the necessity of an experimental basis for all positive knowledge,

viewed in connexion with the existence and the peculiar character of that

system of mental laws, and principles, and operations, to which attention has

been directed, tends to throw light upon some important questions by which

the world of speculative thought is still in a great measure divided. How,

from the particular facts which experience presents, do we arrive at the

general propositions of science? What is the nature of these propositions? Are

they solely the collections of experience, or does the mind supply some

connecting principle of its own? In a word, what is the nature of scientific

truth, and what are the grounds of that confidence with which it claims to be

received?

That to such questions as the above, no single and general answer can be

given, must be evident. There are cases in which they do not even need

discussion. Instances are familiar, in which general propositions merely

express per enumerationem simplicem, a fact established by actual

observation in all the cases to which the proposition applies. The astronomer

asserts upon this ground, that all the known planets move from west to east

round the sun. But there are also cases in which general propositions are

assumed from observation of their truth in particular instances, and extension

of that truth to instances unobserved. No principle of merely deductive

reasoning can warrant such a procedure. When from a large number of

observations on the planet Mars, Kepler inferred that it revolved in an ellipse,

the conclusion was larger than his premises, or indeed than any premises

which mere observation could give. What other element, then, is necessary to

give even a prospective validity to such generalizations as this? It is the

ability inherent in our nature to appreciate Order, and the concurrentpresumption, however founded, that the phenomcna of Nature are connected

by a principle of Order. Without these, the general truths of physical science

could never have been ascertained. Grant that the procedure thus established

can only conduct us to probable or to approximate results; it only follows,

that the larger number of the generalizations of physical science possess but a

probable or approximate truth. The security of the tenure of knowledge

consists in this, that wheresoever such conclusions do truly represent the

constitution of Nature, our confidence in their truth receives indefinite

confirmation, and soon becomes undistinguishable from certainty. The

existence of that principle above represented as the basis of inductive

reasoning enables us to solve the much disputed question as to the necessity

of general propositions in reasoning. The logician affirms, that it is

impossible to deduce any conclusion from particular premises. Modern

writers of high repute have contended, that all reasoning is from particular to

particular truths. They instance, that in concluding from the possession of a

property by certain members of a class, its possession by some other member,

it is not necessary to establish the intermediate general conclusion which

affirms its possession by all the members of the class in common. Now

whether it is so or not, that principle of order or analogy upon which the

reasoning is conducted must either be stated or apprehended as a general

truth, to give validity to the final conclusion. In this form, at least, the

necessity of general propositions as the basis of inference is confirmed,—a

necessity which, however, I conceive to be involved in the very existence,

and still more in the peculiar nature, of those faculties whose laws have been

investigated in this work. For if the process of reasoning be carefully

analyzed, it will appear that abstraction is made of all peculiarities of the

individual to which the conclusion refers, and the attention confined to those

properties by which its membership of the class is defined.

5. But besides the general propositions which are derived by induction

from the collated facts of experience, there exist others belonging to the

domain of what is termed necessary truth. Such are the general propositions

of Arithmetic, as well as the propositions expressing the laws of thought upon

which the general methods of this treatise are founded; and these propositions

are not only capable of being rigorously verified in particular instances, but

are made manifest in all their generality from the study of particular

instances. Again, there exist general propositions expressive of necessary

truths, but incapable, from the imperfection of the senses, of being exactlyverified. Some, if not all, of the propositions of Geometry are of this nature;

but it is not in the region of Geometry alone that such propositions are found.

The question concerning their nature and origin is a very ancient one, and as

it is more intimately connected with the inquiry into the constitution of the

intellect than any other to which allusion has been made, it will not be

irrelevant to consider it here. Among the opinions which have most widely

prevailed upon the subject are the following. It has heen maintained, that

propositions of the class referred to exist in the mind independently of

experience, and that those conceptions which are the subjects of them are the

imprints of eternal archetypes. With such archetypes, conceived, however, to

possess a reality of which all the objects of sense are but a faint shadow or

dim suggestion, Plato furnished his ideal world. It has, on the other hand,

been variously contended, that the subjects of such propositions are copies of

individual objects of experience; that they are mere names; that they are

individual objects of experience themselves; and that the propositions which

relate to them are, on account of the imperfection of those objects, bnt

partially true; lastly, that they are intellectual products formed by abstraction

from the sensible perceptions of individual things, but so formed as to

become, what the individual things never can be, subjects of science, i. e.

subjects concerning which exact and general propositions may be affirmed.

And there exist, perhaps, yet other views, in some of which the sensible, in

others the intellectual or ideal, element predominates.

Now if the last of the views above adverted to be taken (for it is not

proposed to consider either the purely ideal or the purely nominalist view)

and if it be inquired what, in the sense above stated, are the proper objects of

science, objects in relation to which its propositions are true without any

mixture of error, it is conceived tbat but one answer can be given. It is, that

neither do individual objects of experience, nor with all probability do the

mental images which they suggest, possess any strict claim to this title. It

seems to be certain, that neither in nature nor in art do we meet with anything

absolutely agreeing with the geometrical definition of a straight line, or of a

triangle, or of a circle, though the deviation therefrom may be inappreciable

by sense; and it may be conceived as at least doubtful, whether we can form a

perfect mental image, or conception, with which the agreement shall be more

exact. But it is not doubtful that such conceptions, however imperfect, do

point to something beyond themselves, in the gradual approach towards

which all imperfection tends to disappear. Although the perfect triangle, orsquare, or circle, exists not in nature, eludes all our powers of representative

conception, and is presented to us in thought only, as the limit of an indefinite

process of abstraction, yet, by a wonderful faculty of the understanding, it

may be made the subject of propositions which are absolutely true. The

domain of reason is thus revealed to us as larger than that of imagination.

Should any, indeed, think that we are able to picture to ourselves, with rigid

accuracy, the scientific elements of form, direction, magnitude, &c., these

things, as actually conceived, will, in the view of such persons, be the proper

objects of science. But if, as seems to me the more just opinion, an incurable

imperfection attaches to all our attempts to realize with precision these

elements, then we can only affirm, that the more external objects do approach

in reality, or the conceptions of fancy by abstraction, to certain limiting states,

never, it may be, actually attained, the more do the general propositions of

science concerning those things or conceptions approach to absolute truth, the

actual deviation therefrom tending to disappear. To some extent, the same

observations are applicable also to the physical sciences. What have been

termed the "fundamental ideas" of those sciences as force, polarity,

crystallization, &c.,* are neither, as I conceive, intellectual products

independent of experience, nor mere copies of external things; but while, on

the one hand, they have a necessary antecedent in experience, on the other

hand they require for their formation the exercise of the power of abstraction,

in obedience to some general faculty or disposition of our nature, which ever

prompts us to the research, and qualifies us for the appreciation, of order, f

Thus we study approximately the effects of gravitation on the motions of the

heavenly bodies, by a reference to the limiting supposition, that the planets

are perfect spheres or spheroids. We determine approximately the path of a

ray of light through the atmosphere, by a process in which abstraction is

made of all disturbing influences of temperature. And such is the order of

procedure in all the higher walks of human knowledge. Now what is

remarkable in connexion with these processes of the intellect is the

disposition, and the corresponding ability, to ascend from the imperfect

representations of sense and the diversities of individual experience, to the

perception of general, and it may be of immutable truths. Whereever this

disposition and this ability unite, each series of connected facts in nature may

furnish the intimations of an order more exact than that which it directly

manifests. For it may serve as ground and occasion for the exercise of those

powers, whose office it is to apprehend the general truths which are indeedexemplified, but never with perfect fidelity, in a world of changeful

phenomena.

      • Whewell's Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, pp. 71, 77, 213.

    t Of the idea of order it has been profoundly said, that it carries within

    itself its own justification or its own control, the very trustworthiness of

    our faculties being judged by the conformity of their results to an order

    which satisfies the reason. "L'idee de l'ordre a cela de singulier et

    d'eminent, qu'elle porte en elle meme sa justification ou son contr61e.

    Pour trouver si nos autres facultes nous trompent ou nous ne trompent

    pas, nous examinons si les notions qu'elles nous donnent s'cnchalnent on

    ne s'enchalnent pas suivant un ordre qui satisfasse la raison."—Cournot,

    Essai sur les fondements de no2 Connniseances. Admitting this

    principle as the guide of those powers of abstraction which we

      undoubtedly possess, it seems unphilosophical to assume that the

    fundamental ideas of the sciences are not derivable from experience.

    Doubtless the capacities which have been given to us for the

    comprehension of the actual world would avail us in a differently

    constituted scene, if in some form or other the dominion of order was

    still maintained. It is conceivable that in such a new theatre of

      speculation, the laws of the intellectual procedure remaining the same,

    the fundamental ideas of the sciences might be wholly different from

    those with which we are at present acquainted.

6. The truth that the ultimate laws of thought are mathematical in their

form, viewed in connexion with the fact of the possibility of error, establishes

a ground for some remarkable conclusions. If we directed our attention to the

scientific truth alone, we might be led to infer an almost exact parallelism

between the intellectual operations and the movements of external nature.

Suppose any one conversant with physical science, but unaccustomed to

reflect upon the nature of his own faculties, to have been informed, that it had

been proved, that the laws of those faculties were mathematical; it is probable

that after the first feelings of incredulity had subsided, the impression would

arise, that the order of thought must, therefore, be as necessary as that of the

material universe. We know that in the. realm of natural science, the absolute

connexion between the initial and final elements of a problem, exhibited in

the mathematical form, fitly symbolizes that physical necessity which binds

together effect and cause. The necessary sequence of states and conditions inthe inorganic world, and the necessary connexion of premises and conclusion

in the processes of exact demonstration thereto applied, seem to be co-

ordinate. It may possibly be a question, to which of the two series the primary

application of the term '' necessary" is due; whether to the observed constancy

of

Nature, or to the indissoluble connexion of propositions in all valid reasoning

upon her works. Historically we should perhaps give the preference to the

former, philosophically to the latter view. But the fact of the connexion is

indisputable, and the analogy to which it points is obvious.

  Were, then, the laws of valid reasoning uniformly obeyed, a very close

parallelism would exist between the operations of the intellect and those of

external Nature. Subjection to laws mathematical in their form and

expression, even the subjection of an absolute obedience, would stamp upon

the two series one common character. The reign of necessity over the

intellectual and the physical world would be alike complete and universal.

But while the observation of external Nature testifies with ever-

strengthening evidence to the fact, that uniformity of operation and unvarying

obedience to appointed laws prevail throughout her entire domain, the

slightest attention to the processes of the intellectual world reveals to us

another state of things. The mathematical laws of reasoning are, properly

speaking, the laws of right reasoning only, and their actual transgression is a

perpetually recurring phenomenon. Error, which has no place in the material

system, occupies a large one here. We must accept this as one of those

ultimate facts, the origin of which it lies beyond the province of science to

determine. We must admit that there exist laws which even the rigour of their

mathematical forms does not preserve from violation. We must ascribe to

them an authority the essence of which does not consist in power, a

supremacy which the analogy of the inviolable order of the natural world in

no way assists us to comprehend.

As the distinction thus pointed out is real, it remains unaffected by any

peculiarity in our views respecting other portions of the mental constitution.

If we regard the intellect as tree, and this is apparently the view most in

accordance with the general spirit of these speculations, its freedom must be

viewed as opposed to the dominion of necessity, not to the existence of a

certain just supremacy of truth. The laws of correct inference may beviolated, but they do not the less truly exist on this account. Equally do they

remain unaffected in character and authority if the hypothesis of necessity in

its extreme form be adopted. Let it be granted that the laws of valid

reasoning, such as they are determined to be in this work, or, to speak more

generally, such as they would finally appear in the conclusions of an

exhaustive analysis, form but a part of the system of laws by which the actual

processes of reasoning, whether right or wrong, are governed. Let it be

granted that if that system were known to us in its completeness, we should

perceive that the whole intellectual procedure was necessary, even as the

movements of the inorganic world are necessary. And let it finally, as a

consequence of this hypothesis, be granted that the phenomena of incorrect

reasoning or error, wheresoever presented, are due to the interference of other

laws with those laws of which right reasoning is the product. Still it would

remain that there exist among the intellectual laws a number marked out from

the rest by this special character, viz., that every movement of the intellectual

system which is accomplished solely under their direction is right, that every

interference therewith by other laws is not interference only, but violation. It

cannot but be felt that this circumstance would give to the laws in question a

character of distinction and of predominance They would but the more

evidently seem to indicate a final purpose which is not always fulfilled, to

possess an authority inherent and just, but not always commanding

obedience.

Now a little consideration will show that there is nothing analogous to this

in the government of the world by natural law. The realm of inorganic Nature

admits neither of preference nor of distinctions. We cannot separate any

portion of her laws from the rest, and pronounce them alone worthy of

obedience,— alone charged with the fulfilment of her highest purpose. On

the contrary, all her laws seem to stand co-ordinate, and the larger our

acquaintance with them, the more necessary does their united action seem to

the harmony and, so far as we can comprehend it, to the general design of the

system. How often the most signal departures from apparent order in the

inorganic world, such as the perturbations of the planetary system, the

interruption of the process of crystallization by the intrusion of a foreign

force, and others of a like nature, either merge into the conception of some

more exalted scheme of order, or lose to a more attentive and instructed gaze

their abnormal aspect, it is needless to remark. One explanation only of these

facts can be given, viz., that the distinction between true and false, betweencorrect and incorrect, exists in the processes of the intellect, but not in the

region of a physical necessity. As we advance from the lower stages of

organic being to the higher grade of conscious intelligence, this contrast

gradually dawns upon us. Wherever the phasnomena of life are manifested,

the dominion of rigid law in some degree yields to that mysterious principle

of activity. Thus, although the structure of the animal tribes is conformable to

certain general types, yet are those types sometimes, perhaps, in relation to

the highest standards of beauty and proportion, always, imperfectly realized.

The two alternatives, between which Art in the present day fluctuates, are the

exact imitation of individual forms, and the endeavour, by abstraction from

all such, to arrive at the conception of an ideal grace and expression, never, it

may be, perfectly manifested in forms of earthly mould. Again, those

teleological adaptations by which, without the organic type being sacrificed,

species become fitted to new conditions or abodes, are but slowly

accomplished,—accomplished, however, not, apparently, by the fateful

power of external circumstances, but by the calling forth of an energy from

within. Life in all its forms may thus be contrasted with the passive fixity of

inorganic nature. But inasmuch as the perfection of the types in which it is

corporeally manifested is in some measure of an ideal character, inasmuch as

we cannot precisely define the highest suggested excellency of form and of

adaptation, the contrast is less marked here than that which exists between the

intellectual processes and those of the purely material world. For the definite

and technical character of the mathematical laws by which both are governed,

places in stronger light the fundamental difference between the kind of

authority which, in their capacity of government, they respectively exercise.

7. There is yet another instance connected with the general objects of this

chapter, in which the collation of truths or facts, drawn from different

sources, suggests an instructive train of reflection. It consists in the

comparison of the laws of thought, in their scientific expression, with the

actual forms which physical speculation in early ages, and metaphysical

speculation in all ages, have tended to assume. There are two illustrations of

this remark, to which, in particular, I wish to direct attention here.

1st. It has been shown (III. 13) that there is a scientific connexion between

the conceptions of unity in Number, and the universe in Logic. They occupy

in their respective systems the same relative place, and are subject to the

same formal laws. Now to the Greek mind, in that early stage of activity,—astage not less marked, perhaps not less necessary, in the progression of the

human intellect, than the era of Bacon or of Newton, — when the great

problems of Nature began to unfold themselves, while the means of

observation were as yet wanting, and its necessity not understood, the terms "

Universe" and "The One" seem to have been regarded as almost identical. To

assign the nature of that unity of which all existence was thought to be a

manifestation, was the first aim of philosophy.* Thales sought for this

fundamental unity in water. Anaximencs and Diogenes conceived it to be air.

Hippasus of Metapontum, and Heraclitus the Ephesian, pronounced that it

was fire. Less definite or less confident in his views, Parmenides simply

declared that all existing things were One; Melissus that the Universe was

infinite, unsusceptible of change or motion, One, like to itself, and that

motion was not, but seemed to be.f In a spirit which, to the reflective mind of

Aristotle, appeared sober when contrasted with the rashness of previous

speculation, Anaxagoras of Clazomene, following, perhaps, the steps of his

fellow-citizen, Hermotimus, sought in Intelligence the cause of the world and

of its order. J The pantheistic tendency which pervaded many of these

speculations is manifest in the language of Xenophanes, the founder of the

Eleatic school, who, "surveying the expanse of heaven, declared that the One

was God."* Perhaps there are few, if any, of the forms in which unity can be

conceived, in the abstract as numerical or rational, in the concrete as a

passive substance, or a central and living principle, of which we do not meet

with applications in these ancient doctrines. The writings of Aristotle, to

which I have chiefly referred, abound with allusions of this nature, though of

the larger number of those who once addicted themselves to such

speculations, it is probable that the very names have perished. Strange, but

suggestive truth, that while Nature in all but the aspect of the heavens must

have appeared as little else than a scene of unexplained disorder, while the

popular belief was distracted amid the multiplicity of its gods, —the

conception of a primal unity, if only in a rude, material form, should have

struck deepest root; surviving in many a thoughtful breast the chills' of a

lifelong disappointment, and an endless search l\

      • See various passages in Aristotle's Metaphysics, Book I.

    f 'E^orcc Se avrip rojTrav a7rupov ilvai, Kai dvaXXoi<urov, xai

    aKivi2rov, Kai iv, opoiov iavrip Kai ir\ijpiQ- Kivqaiv TI pfi ilvai IOKIIV Si

      ilvai.—Diog. Laeri. IX. cap. 4.      X NoiJv St\ ric iiiruv iviivai, KaQairip iv roiQ Zi[>oic, Kai iv ry

    <pvaa, rbv airiov rvv Koopov Kai rrjQ rd£cuc /rdae/c olov vifyuv i$avi2

    irap' eiKy \iyovraQ rove irporepov. Qavepuic, piv ovv 'AvaZayopav

    \a\iiv d^du2vov rovruiv TCIV XOyuv, airiav S' *x« irpSripov 'Ep/urifioc 6

      K\aZophu^ iliriiv.—Aritt. Met. I. 3.

  2ndly. In equally intimate alliance with that law of thought which is

expressed by an equation of the second degree, and which has been termed in

this treatise the law of duality, stands the tendency of ancient thought to those

forms of philosophical speculation which are known under the name of

dualism. The theory of Empedocles,t which explained the apparent

contradictions of nature by referring them to the two opposing principles

* Eivo$aviiQ ii... a'xj rbv o\ov ovpavbv airofi\i\jiaQ, ro JV uvai $i]oi rbv

Oifiv.— lb.

    t The following lines, preserved by Sextus Empiricus, and ascribed to

    Timon the Sillograph, are not devoid of pathos :—


    ue Kai eyuiv o<pi\ov ITVKIVOV VOOV avrifio\ijoai 

      a/*0or«po/3Xi7rroc (So\iy S' uvip i^iirarriOqv, 

      irpiaflvyivi'iQ IT iCiv) Kai avap^ilpiaroQ airaaift 

    aKeirroavvnQ- oir^il yap ifibv voov ttpiaai/U, 

    iiQ iv r' avrb ri irav avk\viro. 


    I quote them from Ritter, and venture to give the following version:— 

          Be mine, to partial views no more confin'd 

         Or sceptic doubts, the truth-illumin'd mind! 

            For, long deceiv'd, yet still on Truth intent, 

              Life's waning years in wand'rings wild are spent 

               Still restless thought the same high quest essays, 

         And still the One, the All, eludes my gaze. 


      % Arist. Met. L 4. 6.

of "strife" and "friendship;" and the theory of Leucippus,* which resolved all

existence into the two elements of a plenum and a vacuum, are of this nature.

The famous comparison of the universe to a lyre or a bow,f its "recurrent

harmony" being the product of opposite states of tension, betrays the same

origin. In the system of Pythagoras, which seems to have been a combinationof dualism with other elements derived from the study of numbers, and of

their relations, ten fundamental antitheses are recognised: finite and infinite,

even and odd, unity and multitude, right and left, male and female, rest and

motion, straight and curved, light and darkness, good and evil, the square and

the oblong. In that of Alcma;on the same fundamental dualism is accepted,

but without the definite and numerical limitation with which it is connected in

the Pythagorean system. The grand development of this idea is, however, met

with in that ancient Manichxan doctrine, which not only formed the basis of

the religious system of Persia, but spread widely through other regions of the

East, and became memorable in the history of the Christian Church. The

origin of dualism as a speculative opinion, not yet connected with the

personification of the Evil Principle, but naturally succeeding those doctrines

which had assumed the primal unity of Nature, is thus stated by Aristotle:—"

Since there manifestly existed in Nature things opposite to the good, and not

only order and beauty, but also disorder and deformity; and since the evil

things did manifestly preponderate in number over the good, and the

deformed over the beautiful, some one else at length introduced strife and

friendship as the respective causes of these diverse phenomena."t And in

Greece, indeed, it seems to have been chiefly as a philosophical opinion, or

as an adjunct to philosophical speculation, that the dualistic theory obtained

ground.§ The moral application of the doctrine most in accordance with the

Greek mind is preserved in the great Platonic antithesis of " being and non-

being,"—the connexion of the former with whatsoever is good and true, with

the eternal ideas, and the archetypal world: of the latter with evil, with error,

with the perishable phenomena of the present scene. The two forms of

speculation which we have considered were here blended together; nor was it

during the youth and maturity of Greek philosophy alone that the tendencies

of thought above described were manifested. Ages of imitation caught up and

adopted as their own the same spirit. Especially wherever the genius of Plato

exercised sway was this influence felt. The unity of all real being, its identity

with truth and goodness considered as to their essence; the illusion, the

profound unreality, of all merely phenomenal existence; such were the views,

—such the dispositions of thought, which it chiefly tended to foster. Hence

that strong tendency to mysticism which, when the days of renown, whether

on the field of intellectual or on that of social enterprise, had ended in Greece,

became prevalent in her schools of philosophy, and reached their culminating

point among the Alexandrian Platonists. The supposititious treatises ofDionysius the Areopagite served to convey the same influence, much

modified by its contact with Aristotelian doctrines, to the scholastic

disputants of the middle ages. It can furnish no just ground of controversy to

say, that the tone of thought thus encouraged was as little consistent with

genuine devotion as with a sober philosophy. That kindly influence of human

affections, that homely intercourse with the common things of life, which

form so large a part of the true, because intended, discipline of our nature,

would be ill replaced by the contemplation even of the highest object of

thought, viewed by an excessive abstraction as something concerning which

not a single intelligible proposition could either be affirmed or denied.* I

would but slightly allude to those connected speculations on the Divine

Nature which ascribed

      • Arist. Met. I. 4, 9.

    f iraXivrpoiroQ apfiovirj OKWQ irip TO£OV i:ai Xvprjc Heraclitus, quoted in

    Oriyenis Philosophumena, ix. 9. Also Plutarch, JDe hide et Osiride.

      X 'E/Tti Si Kai ravai'Tia roie ayafluTf Ivavra iQaiviro iv ry <piali,

    Ka't oil fi6vov TaZic Kai TO KAXOV dX\d Kai draZia Kai T6 alaxpov, Kai

    ~Xtiw rd 2caca TWV dyaBwv Kai TU tpuvXa ru>v tcaXwv, ovrwQ aXXoc

    r*C piXiav tiatjvtyKt Kai vitKOC, iKUTipov tKaripuiv a'rtov roiruiv Aritt.

      Mctaphysica, I. 4.

      § Witness Aristotle's well-known derivation of the elements from the

    qualities "warm," and "dry," and their contraries. It is characteristic that

    Plato connects their generation with mathematical principles.— Timaus,

    cap. xi.

      • Auric Kai liirip Qiaiv itrri «ai a<paipiaiv Dion. Areop. De Diiinis

    Ao

    minibu2, cap. II.

to it the perfect union of opposite qualities,* or to the remarkable treatises of

Anselm, designed to establish a theory of the universe upon the analogies of

thought and being.f The primal unity is there represented as having its abode

in the one eternal Truth. The conformity of Nature to her laws, the obedience

of moral agents to the dictates of rectitude, are the same Truth seen in action;

the world itself being but an expression of the self-reflecting thought of itsAuthor.! Still more marked was the revival of the older forms of speculation

during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The friends and associates of

Lorenzo the Magnificent, the recluses known in England as the Cambridge

Platonists, together with many meditative spirits scattered through Europe,

devoted themselves anew, either to the task of solving the ancient problem,

De Uno, Vero, Bono, or to that of proving that all such inquiries are futile

and vain. § The logical elements which underlie all these speculations, and

from which they appear to borrow at least their form, it would be easy to

trace in the outlines of more modern systems,—more especially in that

association of the doctrine of the absolute unity with the distinction of the ego

and the non-ego as the type of Nature, which forms the basis of the

philosophy of Hegel. The attempts of speculative minds to ascend to some

high pinnacle of truth, from which they might survey the entire framework

and connexion of things in the order of deductive thought, have differed less

in the forms of theory which they have produced, than through the nature of

the interpretations which have been assigned to those forms.* And herein lies

the real question as to the influence of philosophical systems upon the

disposition and the life. For though it is of slight moment that men should

agree in tracing back all the forms and conditions of being to a primal unity,

it is otherwise as concerns their conceptions of what that unity is, and what

are the kinds of relation, beside that of mere causality, which it sustains to

themselves. Herein too may be felt the powerlessness of mere Logic, the

insufficiency of the profoundest knowledge of the laws of the understanding,

to resolve those problems which lie nearer to our hearts, as progressive years

strip away from our life the illusions of its golden dawn.

      • See especially the lofty strain of Hildebert beginning " Alpha et Q

    magnc Deus." (Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry.) The principle upon which

    all these speculations rest is thus stated in the treatise referred to in the

    last note. Ovciv ovv droirov, 1% upvepuv IIKOVUIV ITTI TO iravruiv airiov

    dra/3avrac, viriprofr/iioic b^QdKpoiQ Qeupijaai iravra iv rip iravruv

    airly, Kai r& d\\2\\oiQ ivav

    ri'a povoii&'uiQ »'»' *ivii>fiivuiQ lie Divinie Nominibus, cap. v. And the

    kind of

    knowledge which it is thus sought to attain is described as a "darkness

    beyond light," v7rip$uroQ yvo<po£. (De Mystica Theologia, cap. I.)

    Milton has a similar thought—        "Dark with excessive bright Thy skirts appear."

      Par. Loit, Book in. Contrast with these the nobler simplicity of 1

    John, i. 5.

    f Monologium, Prosologium, and De Veritate.

      X "Idcirco cum ipse summus spiritus dicit seipsum dicit omnia qua?

    facta sunt."—Monohg. cap. xxm.

      § See dissertations in Spinoza, Picus of Mirandula, H. More, &c.

    Modern discussions of this nature are chiefly in connexion with

    iesthetics, the ground of the application being contained in the formula

    of Augustine: "Omnis porro pulchritudinis forma, unitas est."

8. If the extremely arbitrary character of human opinion be considered, it

will not be expected, nor is it here maintained, that the above are the only

forms in which speculative men have shaped their conjectural solutions of the

problem of existence. Under particular influences other forms of doctrine

have arisen, not unfrequently, however, masking those portrayed above.t But

the wide prevalence of the particular theories which we have considered,

together with their manifest analogy with the expressed laws of thought, may

justly be conceived to indicate a connexion between the two systems. As all

other mental acts and procedures are beset by their peculiar fallacies, so the

operation of that law of thought termed in this work the law of duality may

have its own peculiar tendency to error, exalting mere want of agreement into

contrariety, and thus form a world which we necessarily view as formed of

parts supplemental to each other, framing the conception of a world

fundamentally divided by opposing powers. Such, with some large but hasty

inductions from phenomena, may have been the origin of dualism,—

independently of the question whether dualism is in any form a 'true theory or

not. Here, however, it is of more importance to consider in detail the bearing

of these ancient forms of speculation, as revived in the present day, upon the

progress of real knowledge; and upon this point I desire, in pursuance of what

has been said in the previous section, to add the following remarks:

      • For instance, the learned mysticism of Gioberti, widely as it differs

    in its spirit and its conclusions from the pantheism of Hegel (both being,

    perhaps, equally remote from truth), resembles it in applying both to

    thought and to being the principles of unity and duality. It is asked:    —"Or non e cgli chiaro che ogni discorso si riduce in fine in line alle

    idee di Dio, del mondo, e delta crcazione, l'ultima delle quali e il legame

    delle duo prime?" And this question being affirmatively answered in the

    formula, "l'Ente crea le esistenze," it is said of that formula,—" Essa

    abbraccia la realta universale nella dualita del necessarioe del

    contingente, esprime il vincolo di questi 1lue ordini, e collocandolo

    nella creazion sostanziale, riduce la dualita reale a un principio unico, all

    unita primordial).' dell' Ente non astratto, complessivo, e generico, ma

    concreto, individuato, assoluto, e creatore."—Del Bello e del JJuono, pp.

    30, 31.

    f Evidence in support of this statement will be found in the remarkable

    treatise recently published under the title (the correctness of which

    seems doubtful) of Origenis Philosophumena. The early corruptions of

    Christianity of which it contains the record, though many of theui, as is

    evident from their Ophite character, derived from the very dregs of

    paganism, manifest certain persistent forms of philosophical speculation.

    For the most part they either belong to the dualistic scheme, or recognise

    three principles, primary or derived, between two of which the dualistic

    relation may be traced—Orig. Phil, pp. 135, 139, 150, 235, 253, 264.

1st. All sound philosophy gives its verdict against such speculations, if

regarded as a means of determining the actual constitution of things. It may

be that the progress of natural knowledge tends towards the recognition of

some central Unity in Nature. Of such unity as consists in the mutual relation

of the parts of a system there can be little doubt, and able men have

speculated, not without grounds, on a more intimate correlation of physical

forces than the mere idea of a system would lead us to conjecture. Further, it

may be that in the bosom of that supposed unity are involved some general

principles of division and re-union, the sources, under the Supreme Will, of

much of the related variety of Nature. The instances of sex and polarity have

been adduced in support of such a view. As a supposition, I will venture to

add, that it is not very improbable that, in some such way as this, the

constitution of things without may correspond to that of the mind within. But

such correspondence, if it shall ever be proved to exist, will appear as the last

induction from human knowledge, not as the first principle of scientific

inquiry. The natural order of discovery is from the particular to the universal,

and it may confidently be affirmed that we have not yet advanced sufficientlyfar on this track to enable us to determine what are the ultimate forms into

which all the special differences of Nature shall merge, and from which they

shall receive their explanation.

  2ndly. Were this correspondence between the forms of thought and the

actual constitution of Nature proved to exist, whatsoever connexion or

relation it might be supposed to establish between the two systems, it would

in no degree affect the question of their mutual independence. It would in no

sense lead to the consequence that the one system is the mere product of the

other. A too great addiction to metaphysical speculations seems, in some

instances, to have produced a tendency toward this species of illusion. Thus,

among the many attempts which have been made to explain the existence of

evil, it has been sought to assign to the fact a merely relative character,—to

found it upon a species of logical opposition to the equally relative element of

good. It suffices to say, that the assumption is purely gratuitous. What evil

may be in the eyes of Infinite wisdom and purity, we ean at the best but dimly

conjecture; but to us, in all its forms, whether of pain or defect, or moral

transgression, or reti'ibutory wo, it can wear but one aspect,—that of a sad

and stern reality, against which, upon somewhat more than the highest order

of prudential considerations, the whole preventive force of our nature may be

exerted. Now what has been said upon the particular question just considered,

is equally applicable to many other of the debated points of philosophy; such,

for instance, as the external reality of space and time. We have no warrant for

resolving these into mere forms of the understanding, though they

unquestionably determine the present sphere of our knowledge. And, to speak

more generally, there is no warrant for the extremely subjective tendency of

much modern speculation. Whenever, in the view of the intellect, different

hypotheses are equally consistent with an observed fact, the instinctive

testimony of consciousness as to their relative value must be allowed to

possess authority.

3rdly. If the study of the laws of thought avails us neither to determine the

actual constitution of things, nor to explain the facts involved in that

constitution which have perplexed the wise and saddened the thoughtful in all

ages,—still less does it enable us to rise above the present conditions of our

being, or lend its sanction to the doctrine which affirms the possibility of an

intuitive knowledge of the infinite, and the unconditioned,—whether such

knowledge be sought for in the realm of Nature, or above that realm. We cannever be said to comprehend that which is represented to thought as the limit

of an indefinite process of abstraction. A progression ad infinitum is-

impossible to finite powers. But though we cannot comprehend the infinite,

there may be even scientific grounds for believing that human nature is

constituted in some relation to the infinite. We cannot perfectly express the

laws of thought, or establish in the most general sense the methods of which

they form the basis, without at least the implication of elements which

ordinary language expresses by the terms " Universe" and " Eternity." As in

the pure abstractions of Geometry, so in the domain of Logic it is seen, that

the empire of Truth is, in a certain sense, larger than that of Imagination. And

as there are many special departments of knowledge which can only be

completely surveyed from an external point, so the theory of the intellectual

processes, as applied only to finite objects, seems to involve the recognition

of a sphere of thought from which all limits are withdrawn. If then, on the

one hand, we cannot discover in the laws of thought and their analogies a

sufficient basis of proof for the conclusions of a too daring mysticism; on the

other hand we should err in regarding them as wholly unsuggestive. As parts

of our intellectual nature, it seems not improbable that they should manifest

their presence otherwise than by merely prescribing the conditions of formal

inference. Whatever grounds we have for connecting them with the peculiar

tendencies of physical speculation among the Ionian and Italic philosophers,

the same grounds exist for associating them with a disposition of thought at

once more common and more legitimate. To no casual influences, at least,

ought we to attribute that meditative spirit which then most delights to

commune with the external magnificence of Nature, when most impressed

with the consciousness of sempiternal verities,—which reads in the nocturnal

heavens a bright manifestation of order; or feels in some wild scene among

the hills, the intimations of more than that abstract eternity which had rolled

away ere yet their dark foundations were laid.*

9. Refraining from the further prosecution of a train of thought which to

some may appear to be of too speculative a character, let us briefly review the

positive results to which we have been led. It has appeared that there exist in

our nature faculties which enable us to ascend from the particular facts of

experience to the general propositions which form the basis of Science; as

well as faculties whose office it is to deduce from general propositions

accepted as true the particular conclusions which they involve. It has been

seen, that those faculties are subject in their operations to laws capable ofprecise scientific expression, but invested with an authority which, as

contrasted with the authority of the laws of nature, is distinct, sui generis, and

underived. Further, there has appeared to be a manifest fitness between the

intellectual procedure thus made known to us, and the conditions of that

system of things by which we are surrounded,—such conditions, I mean, as

the existence of species connected by general resemblances, of facts

associated under general laws; together with that union of permanency with

order, which while it gives stability to acquired knowledge, lays a foundation

for the hope of indefinite progression. Human nature, quite independently of

its observed or manifested tendencies, is seen to be constituted in a certain

relation to Truth; and this relation, considered as a subject of speculative

knowledge, is as capable of being studied in its details, is, moreover, as

worthy of being so studied, as arc the several departments of physical

science, considered in the same aspect. I would especially direct attention to

that view of the constitution of the intellect which represents it as subject to

laws determinate in their character, but not operating by the power of

necessity; which exhibits it as redeemed from the dominion of fate, without

being abandoned to the lawlessness of chance. We cannot embrace this view

without accepting at least as probable the intimations which, upon the

principle of analogy, it seems to furnish respecting another and a higher

aspect of our nature,—its subjection in the sphere of duty as well as in that of

knowledge to

• Psalm xc. 2.

fixed laws whose authority does not consist in power,—its constitution with

reference to an ideal standard and a final purpose. It has been thought,

indeed, that scientific pursuits foster a disposition either to overlook the

specific differences between the moral and the material world, or to regard

the former as in no proper sense a subject for exact knowledge. Doubtless all

exclusive pursuits tend to produce partial views, and it may be, that a mind

long and deeply immersed in the contemplation of scenes over which the

dominion of a physical necessity is unquestioned and supreme, may admit

with difficulty the possibility of another order of things. But it is because of

the exclusiveness of this devotion to a particular sphere of knowledge, that

the prejudice in question takes possession, if at all, of the mind. The

application of scientific methods to the study of the intellectual phenomena,

conducted in an impartial spirit of inquiry, and without overlooking thoseelements of error and disturbance which must be accepted as facts, though

they cannot be regarded as laws, in the constitution of our nature, seems to

furnish the materials of a juster analogy.

10. If it be asked to what practical end such inquiries as the above point, it

may be replied, that there exist various objects, in relation to which the

courses of men's actions are mainly determined by their speculative views of

human nature. Education, considered in its largest sense, is one of those

objects. The ultimate ground of all inquiry into its nature and its methods

must be laid in some previous theory of what man is, what are the ends for

which his several faculties were designed, what are the motives which have

power to influence them to sustained action, and to elicit their most perfect

and most stable results. It may be doubted, whether these questions have ever

been considered fully, and at the same time impartially, in the relations here

suggested. The highest cultivation of taste by the study of the pure models of

antiquity, the largest acquaintance with the facts and theories of modern

physical science, viewed from this larger aspect of our nature, can only

appear as parts of a perfect intellectual discipline. Looking from the same

point of view upon the means to be employed, we might be led to inquire,

whether that all but exclusive appeal which is made in the present day to the

spirit of emulation or cupidity, does not tend to weaken the influence of those

more enduring motives which seem to have been implanted in our nature for

the immediate end in view. Upon these, and upon many other questions, the

just limits of authority, the reconciliation of freedom of thought with

discipline of feelings, habits, manners, and upon the whole moral aspect of

the question,—what unfixedness of opinion, what diversity of practice, do we

meet with! Yet, in the sober view of reason, there is no object within the

compass of human endeavours which is of more weight and moment than

this, considered, as I have said, in its largest meaning. Now, whatsoever tends

to make more exact and definite our view of human nature, in any of its real

aspects, tends, in the same proportion, to reduce these questions into

narrower compass, and restrict the limits of their possible solution. Thus may

even speculative inquiries prove fruitful of the most important principles of

action.

11. Perhaps the most obviously legitimate bearing of such speculations

would be upon the question of the place of Mathematics in the system of

human knowledge, and the nature and office of mathematical studies, as ameans of intellectual discipline. No one who has attended to the course of

recent discussions can think this question an unimportant one. Those who

have maintained that the position of Mathematics is' in both respects a

fundamental one, have drawn one of their strongest arguments from the

actual constitution of things. The material frame is subject in all its parts to

the relations of number. All dynamical, chemical, electrical, thermal, action?,

seem not only to be measurable in themselves, but to be connected with each

other, even to the extent of mutual convertibility, by numerical relations of a

perfectly definite kind. But the opinion in question seems to me to rest upon a

deeper basis than this. The laws of thought, in all its processes of conception

and of reasoning, in all those operations of which language is the expression

or the instrument, are of the same kind as are the laws of the acknowledged

processes of Mathematics. It is not contended that it is necessary for us to

acquaint ourselves with those laws in order to think coherently, or, in the

ordinary sense of the terms, to reason well. Men draw inferences without any

consciousness of those elements upon which the entire procedure depends.

Still less is it desired to exalt the reasoning faculty over the faculties of

observation, of reflection, and of judgment. But upon the very ground that

human thought, traced to its ultimate elements, reveals itself in mathematical

forms, we have a presumption that the mathematical sciences occupy, by the

constitution of our nature, a fundamental place in human knowledge, and that

no system of mental culture can be complete or fundamental, which

altogether neglects them.

But the very same class of considerations shows with equal force the error

of those who regard the study of Mathematics, and of their applications, as a

sufficient basis either of knowledge or of discipline. If the constitution of the

material frame is mathematical, it is not merely so. K the mind, in its capacity

of formal reasoning, obeys, whether consciously or unconsciously,

mathematical laws, it claims through its other capacities of sentiment and

action, through its perceptions of beauty and of moral fitness, through its

deep springs of emotion and affection, to hold relation to a different order of

things. There is, moreover, a breadth of intellectual vision, a power of

sympathy with truth in all its forms and manifestations, which is not

measured by the force and subtlety of the dialectic faculty. Even the

revelation of the material universe in its boundless magnitude, and pervading

order, and constancy of law, is not necessarily the most fully apprehended by

him who has traced with minutest accuracy the steps of the greatdemonstration. And if we embrace in our survey the interests and duties of

life, how little do any processes of mere ratiocination enable us to

comprehend the weightier questions which they present! As truly, therefore,

as the cultivation of the mathematical or deductive faculty is a part of

intellectual discipline, so truly is it only a part. The prejudice which would

either banish or make supreme any one department of knowledge or faculty

of mind, betrays not only error of judgment, but a defect of that intellectual

modesty which is inseparable from a pure devotion to truth. It assumes the

office of criticising a constitution of things which no human appointment has

established, or can annul. It sets aside the ancient and just conception of truth

as one though manifold. Much of this error, as actually existent among us,

seems due to the special and isolated character of scientific teaching— which

character it, in its turn, tends to foster. The study of philosophy,

notwithstanding a few marked instances of exception, has failed to keep pace

with the advance of the several departments of knowledge, whose mutual

relations it is its province to determine. It is impossible, however, not to

contemplate the particular evil in question as part of a larger system, and

connect it with the too prevalent view of knowledge as a merely secular

thing, and with the undue predominance, already adverted to, of those

motives, legitimate within their proper limits, which.are founded upon a

regard to its secular advantages. In the extreme case it is not difficult to see

that the continued operation of such motives, uncontrolled by any higher

principles of action, uncorrected by the personal influence of superior minds,

must tend to lower the standard of thought in reference to the objects of

knowledge, and to render void and ineffectual whatsoever elements of a

noble faith may still survive. And ever in proportion as these conditions are

realized must the same effects follow. Hence, perhaps, it is that we

sometimes find juster conceptions of the unity, the vital connexion, and the

subordination to a moral purpose, of the different parts of Truth, among those

who acknowledge nothing higher than the changing aspect of collective

humanity, than among those who profess an intellectual allegiance to the

Father of Lights. But these are questions which cannot further be pursued

here. To some they will appear foreign to the professed design of this work.

But the consideration of them has arisen naturally, either out of the

speculations which that design involved, or in the course of reading and

reflection which seemed necessary to its accomplishment. 
                                      'A THE END.ERRATA.

Page 37, line 11 from bottom, for y read .
25, foris read b

Z 06, 6 'the letter w imperfuct, like o,
10, for i read 0.
120, — 1, Tast term, for = read &
128, — 4 from bottom, for & read 3.

6 from bottom, for =i + = read 55 + .
8 from bottom, the letter 1 imperfect, ke .
2, for £z read 3.
18, for ey read iy,
10'from bottom, for vz read v
2 from bottom. or p, 1, , read i 1, 7.
2, Tor 5 and g read  and s
 from botiom, for Xy read XY.
1L fo 5 read
10, dele (1) gives.
1, fory + 5 read y ¢ 5.
10'ffom bottom, profx
vead lmits.

 

 

13 from bottom, for s =0 read
9 from bottom, omit the comma.

4 from bottom, for 7 5.

bottom line, read the second torm as 577.
line 6, for » read .
5" from bottom, for pm read K.

16, supply the iter .
10’ from bottom, for &, read 21,
2, for 91" 4187 read 914187

T, forp=r read p—r.

3,5, and 6 from bottom, for 1 read 0=

6, for zn read .

13, w imporfect,
16, or toy read fm.

7 feom bottom, for 1. read Ty
5, omit namely.

  

 read i

   

 

 

 

T

  
 
 
 
 
 
                        Table of Contents


Front Cover

CHAPTER

Signs and their Laws,

Derivation of the Laws,

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER VI

Of Elimination,

Of Reduction,

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER XI

Methods in Secondary Propositions,

Clarke and Spinoza,

CHAPTER XIV

Of the Abistotelian Logic,

CHAPTER XVI

General Method in Probabilities,

Elementary Illustrations,

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XXI

Constitution of the Intellect,