                    Ask Me Anything about Psychopathy!

            With Link to video version of book (at end of book)


                                    Freud Institute

                                www.freudinstitute.com



There are those who are in this world but not of it. I am referring to psychopaths. A psychopath is
someone who has no real values and therefore does not have a distinctively human psychological
architecture. Most psychopaths are not criminals (even though psychopaths are disproportionately
likely to go into crime). To be a psychopath is not to be criminal; it is to be a fraud. And there are many
more psychopaths than most people, and even most clinicians, realize. In fact, I believe that new forms
of psychopathy are coming into existence, owing to the fact that human being are living in increasingly
artificial social and physical environments and are under increasing pressure to adopt views that are
politically mandated, as opposed to inherently reasonable. I have a vast amount of personal and
professional experience dealing with psychopaths, and I have experienced, and also studied, many
different forms of this insidious and rapidly spreading condition. 


What are the ways to test psychopathy?

KHUSHBOO

The term ‘psychopath’ is ambiguous. Sometimes it refers to deeply

misanthropic or anti-social people, who may have integrity, often

considerable integrity. And sometimes it refers to people who utterly lack

integrity. The Unabomber had integrity—indeed, his life was rigidly

principle-driven—but he was morbidly, criminally anti-social. So he was a

psychopath in the sense that he was anti-social, not in the sense that he lacked

integrity. Most so-called psychopaths are psychopaths in the sense that they

lack integrity. Con-artists fall into this category—for example, the people

who try to lure you into multi-level marketing schemes—and so do slimy

bureaucrats and all other empty fraudster husks. The way to ‘test’ for the

second kind of psychopathy is this: Are for they for real? Or are their

statements and actions always purely expediency-driven? Do they merely go

wherever the wind is blowing? If so, they are psychopaths, in the sense that

they utterly lack integrity. And make no mistake: that is a very distinctive

psychological condition. There was a psychology professor at Berkeley who

was comparing the brain-scans of non-psychopaths to the brain-scans of

drifters, con-artists, and other psychopaths (of the non-integrity-variety). He

came across one very distinctively psychopathic brain-scan—it was largelygreyed out in the way characteristic of no-integrity-psycopath brain-scans.

And it turned out to be his own. He thought it was because he came from a

long-line of criminals. But the real story is that he was a bureaucrat-professor,

who, like all b ureaucrat-professors, was slimy phony who had long since

forfeited sacrificed integrity to department-politics, thereby blacking out most

of his alreacy weak brain. As for the other kind of psychopathy—no testing

needed there. If they are hermits who grouch others, then they are ipso facxto

anti-social and ipso facxto psychopathic, in the sense, tautologously, that they

are anti-social. But that sort of psychopath is not deceptive—quite the

opposite.


NATASHAVIRTUAL

Do you know of any psycopaths that have proven to be the most

exceptional or unconventional, even given their condition?

MAY 4, 2:13AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

There are many. Politics and business are loaded with psychopaths, Bill

Clinton being a prime example. Also, cult leaders are categorically

psychopaths, e.g. Charles Manson, Jim Jones. Some actors are psychopaths--

and sometimes they themselves portray psychopaths. (I suspect---but do not

know--that Kevin Spacey is a psychopath. Or maybe it's just that he plays

them very well.) Jimmy Savile was a heavy duty psychopath. The list goes on

and on. Also, there are a lot of blowhard academics--hip Marxist professors,

and the like---who are psychopaths. (On YouTube, look up Duncan Kennedy,

Harvard Law School: he's a psychopath.) There are psychopaths in all walks

of life, but when psychopaths succeed, it tends to be in areas involving

charisma and flash: pop culture, counter culture, and politics, being the big

ones. Also, on YouTube, look up Keala Kanae: that will give you a pretty

good idea of what an actual 'practicing' psychopahy is like.

Last edited @ May 4, 12:32PM EDT.MAY 4, 12:29PM EDT0

LIANCHUY

Besides having a "squishy/non-integral" personality, what are other

telltale signs of psychopathy?

MAY 3, 2:33AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

There are different kinds of psychopaths. But when it comes to the textbook

sort of psychopath--this being the 'early-onset' psychopath, the person who

psychopathizes early in life---they are con-artists, cheats, swindlers...they are

slick and glib. They talk fast and loose. They lack integrity, and vacillate 

between being falsely ingratiating and very genuinely evil. They have a

'synthetic', 'fake' quality. 

MAY 3, 12:31PM EDT0








MMALAHOO

Are there measurable "degrees" to psycopathy(think a Richter scale, but

for psycopathy instead of earthquakes)?

MAY 2, 6:05PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKIYes. Psychopathy is like cancer--it IS a kind of cancer, actually. And just as

one can have Stage 1 or Stage 4 cancer, so one can be a Stage 1 or a Stage 4

psychopath. In other words, one can be rotted out just a little bit by a

psychopathy or one can be totally rotted out by it. But as a general rule, once

it gets its foot in the door, the rest is a foregone and grim conclusion.

MAY 2, 8:57PM EDT0

VIPULMTR

Have there been observed cases of a psychopath having another

problematic condition, such as Schizophrenia?

MAY 2, 10:53AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Yes. Psychopaths can have tons of psychological problems. Charles Manson

was a psychopath, and he was also psychotic. Same with Jim Jones (the cult

leader). Psychosis and psychopathy are compatible. Neurosis, however, is not

compatible with psychopathy, since neurosis is about a conflict between one's

conscience and one's urges, and psychopaths have no conscience.

MAY 2, 11:30AM EDT0

WANGEM01

Do you personally know a person who is a psychopath?

MAY 1, 10:17PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Yes. I know plenty. Everybody does. They just don't know it.

MAY 2, 11:29AM EDT0FUNNYBUNNY0

If a psychopath wants to get treatment/help, what kind of doctor must he

go to?

MAY 1, 4:23PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Psychopaths don't want treatment, and they cannot benefit from treatment.

Psychopathy is not so much a condition as it is a certain kind of

psychological structure. And a leopard cannot change its spots; therapy can

help people change how they are who they are, but it cannot change who they

are. If someone is a psychopath, that is who they are, and therefore no

changing it. Also, psychopathy is a response to external threats; it is a

psychological defense that, although toxic, came into existence to ensure the

survival of the person in question. So psychopathy is not only deeply rooted

but also functional, at least at certain junctures.

MAY 1, 4:55PM EDT0








RICKYIP

How would one know if a person is a psychopath?

MAY 1, 10:39AM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Long story short: they are phony. There are two different kinds of

psychopaths: early-onset and late-onset. The early-onset psychopath is

someone who psychopathized in childhood. Such a person is slick, deceptive,

and very clearly phony. They tend to be 'blingy' and brazenly concerned with

status and appearance. The late-onset psychopath is someone who

psychopathized in order to move ahead professionally.  Such a person is

phony, but in a different way from the early oneset psychopath. The late

onset psychopathy tends to be a bureaucrat or a garden-variety fraud. The

academic world is loaded with late-onset psychopaths--with stuffed shirt

phonies who haven't a shred of integerity and are therefore psychopaths.

Show business and politics and straight-up crime are havens for early-onset

psychopaths.

MAY 1, 4:58PM EDT0

JOEJIMAR

Can a psychopath disorder be contagious? Like if one lives with a

psychopath, is it highly possible for him to become a psychopath

eventually?

MAY 1, 5:23AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Short answer---no. Long answer--not really. But there is a way that

psychopathy can spread. It can spread when institutions become

psychopathized, which they often do, which tends to cause the people within

them to become psychopathic. An entire country can become psychopathized,as was the case in Cambodia under Pol Pot, and as is the case, albeit to a

much lesser extent, here in the USA. 

MAY 1, 5:00PM EDT0

SAFTAIN342

Aside from psychopathy, what do you do? Do you have another day job?

MAY 1, 5:12AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Writing about psychopathy doesn't exactly pay the bills, fun as it is to do. I

am a psychoanalyst and an online instructor. And I am starting an online

tutoring agency: www.philosophypedia.com My online psychoanlaytic

practice is at: www.freudinstitute.com 

MAY 1, 5:00PM EDT0

SAFTAIN342

Would you say that being a psychopath can be inherited?

MAY 1, 12:43AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

There often is a heavy genetic component to psychopathy. But it is seldom, if

ever, completely inherited. There is usually an environmental component---

usually an emotionally impoverished childhood. Of course, if someone has

the genetic basis of psychopathy, then there is a good chance that at least one

of their parents is  a psychopath (or both, since psychopaths tend to bind to

each other), so that such a person will both have an emotionally impoverished

(and therefore psychopathogenic) childhood. MAY 1, 5:02PM EDT0

MARAJAVS

How does living with a psycopath affect other people, family members

for example?

APR 26, 10:04PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

It's horrible. They usually don't quite know it, and it eats them alive. 

APR 26, 10:50PM EDT0

STARFALL1

Is there a known cure for Psychopathy?

APR 25, 7:22PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

No. And even if there is an unknown cure, it probably wouldn't be the sort of

thing that could be implemented any time soon.

APR 26, 10:51PM EDT0

DASHA BABUSKO

When did you meet your first psychopath and how did you know the

person was one?

APR 25, 6:26PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Each of us has met psychopaths. But looking back, I now realize that the first

time I met a psychopath, and knew that he was a psychopath, was when I was

a freshman in college. (I did not yet associate his condition with the term

'psychopath', but I did know him to be one.) He was completely phony. A

caricature of a person. And he would make comments and act in ways that a

bad computer program would have judged to be reasonable---it was as though

he were playing a part in a sitcom that was written by a robot that was trying

to write about humans. Everything was fake. I asked him once why he hadn't

seen the Godfather (the Movie), and he said, after hesitating and going

through different possible answers in his head, 'because I don't to be affected

by the violence in it.' And this was a guy who stuck thumbtacks into the eyes

of people on posters on his wall. Everything he said and did was an act. And

people were stupid about it. They bought it. But it was so obvious. And he

became a psychiatrist, as did two other psychopaths that I met my freshman

year in college. 

Last edited @ Apr 26, 10:57PM EDT.

APR 26, 10:55PM EDT0

KEENAJOTH

What is the best way to deal with a psychopath? Is it to avoid them

altogether? Are they dangerous?

APR 24, 1:54PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The main danger is that they will waste your time, demoralize you, orswindle you. It is not likely, except under unusual circumstances, that they

will physically harm you. But it is 100% likely that time spent with them is

wasted time. Just avoid. 

APR 24, 3:06PM EDT0

LIGHT

Do you ever fear for yourself when dealing with psychopaths?

APR 24, 8:45AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I don't deal with them too often. They don't enlist my professional services,

since they have nothing to gain from dealing with me (and a lot to lose, given

that, as they know, I see through them). It isn't so much that I am afraid of

them as it is that there is nothing to gain from dealing with them. There is no

such thing as an equitable transaction with a psychopath. They are predators,

parasites, and cheats. They take but do not give. And when confronted about

this, they manipulate. They are basically a waste of time, and there is no good

way to deal with them, except to avoid them (which, sadly, is not always

possible).

APR 24, 3:08PM EDT0








YANNYREY

What does being a functional psychopath mean?

APR 24, 8:34AM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The tendency for psychopaths is to be screw-ups--drifters, petty con-artists,

low-lifes. But that is indeed just a tendency. There are psychopaths who are

physicians, CEO's, military officers, attorneys, politicians, actors, professors,

and so on. In fact, there are some lines of work that are loaded with

functional psychopaths, the main ones being academia, politics, and show-

business. Sometimes a psychopath can find an area of professional endeavor

that complements his psychopathy; and when that happens, the result is a

functional psychopath. The difference between the functional and the

dysfunctional psychopath lies not so much in the psychopath per se as it does

in whether he has been 'paired' with a line of work in which his psychopathy

can be an asset. And in politics, academia, and show-business, psychopathy

can most definitely be an asset. 

APR 24, 3:42PM EDT0

LHYN GREGORIO

What are the latest treatment modalities for psychopathy?

APR 24, 4:13AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

There is no treatment. And I doubt that there ever will be. Therapy cannot

change the basic structure of one's mind. It can deal with structure-internal

issues; it cannot deal with structural issues. And psychopathy is most

definitely a structural issue. Getting someone to stop being a psychopath

would be like getting someone to change their sexual orientation---it can't be

done (or so I believe...I'm not 100% sure...though I am sure that, therapistsbeing who they are, there does not exist, and probably never will exist, an

actual treatment).

APR 24, 3:34PM EDT0








BASHIR1122

What is the difference between a psychopath and a sociopath?

APR 21, 9:39AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Those terms tend to be used interchangeably. Sometimes the term

"psychpoath" is used to refer to someone who is 100% a psychopath, whereas

the term "sociopath" is used to refer to someone who is only half way there.

But for the most part, those terms are treated as synonyms. That said, there

are important divisions within the class of psychopaths, and some authors

(myself included) have used the term "psychopath" to refer to members of

some of those subsets and "sociopath" to refer to members of different such

subsets. In my book 'Empiricism and the Foundations of Psychology', I use

the term 'psychopath' to refer to people who never even developed the

character-structure of someone with a conscience, and I use the term

'sociopath' to refer to people who once had a conscience, along with the

associated character-structure, but who at some point in live dismantled their

consciences. 

APR 24, 3:28PM EDT0

JOE

What are the factors contributing to psychopathy?

APR 20, 6:27PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Psychopathy is about phoniness. It is about having a mask for an identity

instead of having a real identity. And people where masks because they are in

circumstances where their survival depends on their wearing masks. Such

circumstances include situations where parents are cold, manipulative, or

otherwise abusive and where, consequently, children can survive only by

being liars and, therefore, by themselves becoming lies. And such

circumstances also include bureaucracies and other settings where

institutional lies are given more weight than the truth. 

APR 20, 9:33PM EDT0

DEBENJY91

What makes a psychopath functional or dysfunctional?

APR 20, 4:30PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Psychopathy is the product of a defensive responsive to circumstances where

it is in one's interest, and maybe even necessary for one's survival, to

manipulate and lie. And in circumstances where it is necessary to tell lies, it

tends to become necessary to become a lie. And that is what the psychopath

is--a lie. And that is why he is dysfunctional. And it is also why he is

functional. Let me explain. He is dysfunctional because in order to function

in the long term, it necessary to respect the truth; and for the psycopath, there

is no truth, only convenient fictions.. At the same time, the psychopath is

functional because in the short term, it is necessary to know what it is

expedient to say and do; and the psychopath, being the short-term-orientedpragmatist that he is, knows how to speak and act in a way that is

momentarily expedient. In general, people who lack values tend to be

functional in the short term but they ultimately lose out, since a non-value-

based, strictly pragmatic approach to life embodies ignorance of everything

that doesn't impinge on one at a given moment and therefore embodies

ignorance of that of which those are long-term successful are mindful. 

APR 20, 9:40PM EDT0








ZARAKEISHA

Do psychopaths exhibit violent behavior?

APR 19, 11:55PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

They can. But the vast majority of the time, they don't. Psychopathy is about

phoniness. Psychopaths are manipulators and frauds. They can be violent.

And if somebody is extremely violent, it is a veritable certainty that he is a

psychopath of some kind or other. But less than 10% are overtly violent.

APR 20, 12:44AM EDT0

JQUIAMBS

Have you read a book called "The psychopath test" ? If yes, what did

you think of it?

APR 17, 4:08AM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I looked it up just after getting your question. I haven't read it, but will do so. 

APR 20, 12:44AM EDT0

SHWETA

Do you specialize in psychopathy specifically? Why did you choose such

a difficult field?

APR 16, 11:18PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I do not specialize in it. Or, rather, it is only of many specialties. But I chose

it because it chose me. As in, I had to deal with so many psychopathic people

and situations that I had no choice but learn about psychopathy. And once I

became aware of the concept of psychopathy, I found more and more

applications for it, especially in connection with bureaucracies, specifically,

educational bureaucracies.

APR 17, 12:12AM EDT0

HASEEB_ALI

What are some of the ways a person can identify psychopaths in real

life?

APR 16, 5:09PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

A psychopath is ultimately just somebody who has absolutely no integrity. 

And somebody who has no integrity has a 'squishy' identity. They'll be one

way in one context, and a different way in a different context. They say and

do whatever it is that, at the moment, it is expedient for them to do. They are

therefore glib and insubstantial. If you can't pin someone down, they are a

psychopath. If they play games with you and string you along, they are a

psychopath. Some psychopaths are predators. Most are just very weak

people.

APR 16, 5:48PM EDT0

PONCJO

Do you think psychopathy is a brain malfunction and is it something that

can be treated once identified?

APR 16, 10:12AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Psychopathy is a brain-malfunction only to the extent that any given mental

illness is a brain-malfunction. A true example of a brain-malfunction would

be a purely organic illness, such as Alzheimer's. Alzheimer's doesn't have to

do with a person's psychological history; it is not a consequence of emotional

upheavals. But psychopath is, in each and every case, a consequence of

extremely adverse circumstances.  It is a defensive response to such

circumstances. And even though, morally speaking, psychopathy is a

'malfunction', it is not clear that, psychologically speaking, it is a

malfunction. From a survival standpoint, psychopathy is a functionalresponse to situations that could not otherwise have been endured. So my

answer to your question is no. While the brains of psychopaths are

distinctive, they are not distinctive in a strictly pathological way, and there

would be no way to get rid of psychopathy without getting rid of a lot of

legitimate psychological coping mechanisms.

APR 16, 2:19PM EDT0

TANYA_ENGELBRECHT

Who are your favorite psychoanalyst and philosopher?

APR 15, 8:49AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Favorite philosopher: Schopenhauer. Favorite psychoanalyst: Freud.

APR 16, 2:19PM EDT0

A_LAVF

It says that you are also a philosopher. Has dealing with psychopaths

influenced your views?

APR 14, 6:00AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Yes. It has given me a much deeper understanding than I otherwise would

have had of the structure of the human psyche and, in particular, of the role

that a person's values have in the organization of his mind. Most people, and

most philosophers, use the term 'values' to refer to moral values, and they use

the term 'integrity' to refer to moral integrity. But moral values are actually

values of a derivative kind, and moral integrity is derivative of a deeper kind

of integrity. A value, I now realize, is simply a precept compliance withwhich ensures psychological integrity, and moral integrity is a consequence,

and not the essence, of such psychological integrity.

APR 15, 2:53PM EDT0








BOJANA PEJIC

Could there be psychopaths who are aware of their psychopathy, but still

try to have healthy relationships with their family and friends?

APR 14, 5:20AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Psychopaths know that they are psychopaths. But they do not try to have

healthy relations with anyone, ever. They often try to convince others that

they are trying to have healthy relationships with people. And to this end they

may put on quite a show. But a show is all it is. The concept of a 'healthy

relationship' is as incomprehensible to them as the concept of a square circle

is to you.

APR 17, 12:53AM EDT0

MAGGIE

What inspired you to become a Psychoanalyst?

APR 13, 11:16PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

When I was 18, I read Freud. And it explained so much. He was unbelievably

accurate about so many things, especially OCD, from which I had suffered

for so many years (and from which I would continue to suffer until I myself

underwent analysis). Also, I have always been extremely aware of other

people's thougths and have always been able to read people in a flash. Plus, a

command of psychoanalytic thought--a real command, not a book-based

command---is an enormous source of practical and intellectual power.

Last edited @ May 4, 1:00PM EDT.

APR 14, 12:20AM EDT0

SV9ZIST

You mentioned that new forms of psychopathy are coming into existence.

Do you have any idea how to stop that?

APR 13, 5:07AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Yes. The root of the problem is the educational system. All that needs to be

done is to make education less of a collective, bureuacratic affair and more of

an individualized, non-institutional, non-bureaucratic affair. 

APR 14, 12:21AM EDT0

OLJKA91

What is the difference between primary psychopathy,

APR 13, 3:00AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKIBetween primary psychopathy and what? I am afraid I do not understand

your question. Please clarify.

APR 13, 4:49AM EDT0

PIETRO

Do you ever feel psychopathy and sociopathy is highly romanticized &

glorified? If so, why do you think that's the case?

APR 13, 12:45AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Yes I do. They are enormously glorified. I think that people see psychopaths

as people who are unusually able to act freely. They are represented as being

people who chart their own path and play only by their own rules. But their

behavior is curiously automatic and reflexive. They actually lack the very

autonomy that is attributed to them. And they don't even have the freedom

from morality that is usually credited to them. True--they are immoral and

even amoral. But their lack of morality is not about having no conscience, but

is rather about having a corrupt conscience, to which they have a very

involved relationship and by which they are in fact hemmed in. The dictates

issued by a psychopath's conscience are not moral dictates exactly, but he is

quite as bound by them as a non-psychopath is bound by the dictates of his

conscience. Psychopaths are seen as being existentialists. But they are not

existentialists. They are crippled and stunted, and their behavior is more

reactive than deliberate.

Last edited @ Apr 13, 1:36AM EDT.

APR 13, 1:29AM EDT0RUDI

Is there a link between a genius and a psychopath?

APR 13, 12:03AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Geniuses are not usually psychopaths and psychpaths are not usually

geniuses. But I do think that being a genius can conduce to a certain

psychopathy and also that being a psychopath can conduce to being a genius.

Let me explain. Psychopaths completely lack morality, and this can disinhibit

them when it comes to trying out new ideas and thus to cultivating their own

intelligence. Hence the fact that psychopathy is sometimes conductive to

genius. The road from genius to psychopathy is not as straightforward. First

of all, geniuses are made not born. And becoming a genius tends to involve a

misanthropy and contempt of others: if one is not a bit of a misanthrope. one

will stay too close to the pack and won't strike out one's own, at least not to

the extent needed to be a genius. So a certain ill-will towards people is often

inherent in the process of becoming a genius. And to this extent, genius is

conducive to psychopathy.  But I think that, on the whole, the connection

between genius and psychopathy, though existent, is weak.

APR 13, 1:35AM EDT0

RCCHAN

secondary psychopathy and an antisocial personality disorder?

APR 12, 9:04AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Please clarify the question. Thank, Dr. KAPR 12, 9:06PM EDT0








HONEY BHATTACHARYA

What do you suggest people should do if they think they might be

involved with a psychopath?

APR 12, 9:01AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Each relationship has to be understood on its own terms. The question isn't

whether your partner is a 'psychopath' or not. The question is whether you

like being with that person; the question is whether that relationship gives

you more than it takes from you. If you do like being with that person, and

the relationship gives you strength and energy, then you know everything that

you need to about that person's psychology. And if you don't like being with

that person, and if being with that person robs you of energy and strength,

then, once again, you know everything there is to know about that person. As

it happens, in the first circumstance, the person is not a psychopath, and the

second circumstance, he is. But you should start by determining what the raw

data of experience is--by evaluating on the relationship on its own terms--

before you attempt to understand your situation in terms of (easily

misapplied) psychiatric categories.

Last edited @ Apr 13, 4:50AM EDT.

APR 12, 9:06PM EDT0BRANKO NESIC

How do you deal with psychopaths? What strategies do you use?

APR 9, 4:12AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Just avoid. There is nothing to be gained from dealing with them. They are

slimy; they string you along;  they give little or nothing; and they take a lot,

usually in the form of time and money and general sense of wellness. 

MAY 4, 1:02PM EDT0








AMY DAWN JUDE THADDEUS

Can psychopathy be modified into a positive personality trait?

APR 8, 4:52PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKIThere are some career-paths and activities within which psychopathy can be

an asset. The military actively conscripted psychopaths because they were

such good killers. (The term "natural born killer" is a military term; it was

invented to refer to these psychopath-conscripts.) A lot of salesmen and

marketing people are psychopaths, and employers actively seek such people

when attempting to fill marketing and sales positions. So in that sense

psychopathy can be a positive trait. Can it be a postive character trait in other

respects? Yes--psychopaths are not hobbled by self-doubt and they can

therefore be persistent in a way in which self-doubting and therefore neurotic

people cannot. 

APR 9, 3:36AM EDT0








PATRICIA MAGNO

How long have psychopaths been around? Were there psychopaths in

ancient times?

APR 8, 2:09PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Yes, without any doubt. Psychopathy came into existence as soon as it

became the biological norm for people to have conscience. When a

conscience becomes corrupted, the result is a psychopath. So as long as there

have been consciences to corrupt, there have been psychopaths. And even

some animals have the rudiments of conscience, including, of course, our

immediate evolutionary precursors.

APR 8, 3:45PM EDT0

KNIGHTRIDERAre psychopaths born that way or is it a result of environment and

upbringing?

APR 8, 11:59AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

There is a genetic component. But when I look at the full-blow psychopaths

that I have known or studied, they underwent very serious traumas. The ones

who were psychopaths beginning in youth, were deprived of love as children.

The ones who psychopathized as adults were deprived of love as adults. 

APR 8, 3:47PM EDT0

MIRZA

What new forms of psychopathy are being created today?

APR 8, 7:39AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The world is becoming very bureaucratic and institutionalized. Bureuacrats

are people who have no consciences of their own. Their values have been

drained from them. So the bureaucrat is a kind of psychopath---a particularly

impotent kind of psychopath, but a psychopath no less. And this form of ps

ychopathy is spreading rapidly and so far as I can tell is new. 

APR 8, 3:56PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Added later:  

Are New Kinds of Psychopathy Coming into Existence?

I have said that new forms of psychopathy are spreading. I no longer believe

this. What is happening, so I believe, is that once relatively rare forms of

psychopathy are now become the norm—not just among psychopaths, but

among the general population. Here, more precisely, is what I believe. In the

last few decades, there has been a massive spike in the prevalence of

bureaucrats. By a ‘bureaucrat’ I do not mean a civil servant. I mean

somebody whose values and identity have been drained away and replaced

with phony  institutional values and a phony institutional identity. The

bureaucrat is not usually regarded as a kind of psychopath; but that is in fact

what he is. The difference between bureaucrats and textbook psychopaths is

that the text-books psychopaths never had the character architecture of a non-

psychopath, and they therefore have a kind of amorphousness and

slipperiness of character, whereas the bureaucrats did once have the character

architecture of actual people and, despite no longer have such an architecture,

they still have the formal or skeletal properties thereof. This being

bureaucrats are proverbially brittle and rigid. The textbook psychopath was

hollowed out early in life, and outside of an institutional context; so while

still young, he had to learn how to free-wheel it. The text-book psychopath

psychopathized in the absence of well-defined social norms; so he had to

learn how to operate in the absence of such norms and therefore has a certain

elasticity of character. His psychopathy is about adapting to fluid

circumstances. By contrast, the bureaucrat’s psychopathy is about adapting to

rigid circumstance. The bureaucrat psychopathized late in life, and he did so

in order to continue to be the beneficiary of some institution or institution-

like system of rules. So in order to survive he had to subordinate himself to

those rules and thus become brittle. But the bureaucrat’s psychopathy merely

represents a different contextualization of the same amorality and emptiness

characteristic of the textbook psychopath, and neither is any less a bonafide psychopath than the other.

APR 9, 3:05AM EDT0

MIRZA

Does antipsychotic medication help in managing the symptoms in

psychopaths?

APR 8, 7:37AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Short answer--no. Psychosis and psychopathy are completely unrelated. A

person can be utterly psychotic and have strong values and an intact

conscience. Long answer--if someone is a psychotic who also has

psychopathic tendencies, then, unless medicated, he may be extremely

violent. And medication helps prevent such people from committing violent

crimes. But most psychopaths are non-psychotic, and medication does

nothing to make such people less psychopathic.

APR 8, 3:50PM EDT0








JAN JAN

Is it possible to be a psychopath but still lead a stable and productive

life?

APR 7, 10:27PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Yes. The conventional psychiatric wisdom is that psychopaths are

categorically dysfunctional. But this isn't true. A person who is psychopathic

tends to be dysfunctional. But if such a person chooses the right path, his

psychopathy can actually propel him forward along that path. There are

psychopaths in the military (so-called 'natural born killers') who are

legitimately good at what they do. There are psychopaths in finance (e.g.

Martin Schkreli), entertainment (e.g. Jimmy Saville), and even the

clergy/religion (e.g. Jimmy Swaggart) who are good at what they do and who

thrive doing it. Any given form of psychopathology tends to make those who

have it dysfunctional. But any given psychopathology can always propel

those who have it forward, provided that they choose the right path. 

APR 8, 2:14AM EDT0

JANNATUL

Can a psychopath be both a fraud and a criminal?

APR 7, 5:17PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Absolutely. That combination is almost the norm. First of all, a psychopath is

always a fraud, at least in some contexts. And a psychopath is often a

criminal. Therefore, a pschopath is often both a fraud and a criminal. As for

specific examples: John Waynce Gacy (the serial killer)--he had to be an

arch-fraud when luring his victims into safety. He also posed as a caring

person (as Pogo the Clown, who, ominously, entertained children; and also as

a socially conscience political activist). Ted Bundy--a serial killer who, likeGacy, had to be a fraud to ensnare his victims and who, like Gacy, posed as a

socially conscious citizen, working at a hotline and also, like Gacy, working

as a political activist.  Jim Jones--who posed as crusader for social justice and

then killed 700 or so of the black people with whose rights he was

supposedly concerned . Notice that, in each of these three cases, the false

persona in question served not only the function of deflecting attention away

from the psychopath's actual identity, but also of making it possible for the

psychopath in question to victimize people on a larger scale, and in even

more sinister way, than he could otherwise have done so.

Last edited @ Apr 7, 7:45PM EDT.

APR 7, 7:31PM EDT0

@KANIKA92

What are some of the challenges of dealing with psychopaths?

APR 7, 6:13AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I'm quick to spot psychopaths. For me, the problem isn't figuring out who is

and isn't a psycopath. It is how to extract as much information as I can from

those whom I know to be psychopaths. And there is information to be

extracted. Psychopathy is ultimately about defensiveness. It is a kind of

systemic defensiveness. Psychopaths are slippery and evasive; they are

deceptive and manipulative; and all of these traits are about evasiveness. And

evasiveness is about fear. And getting a psychopath to disclose what he

knows is about engaging him in a way that doesn't activate his trip-wires.

And this can be done. And I have done it. As for dealing with them in a

therapeutic way--as for treating them, in other words--it cannot be done.

What can be done is to give them specific tips or insights; but these they tend

to use for evil, not for good.

APR 7, 7:28PM EDT0

LEIRB

What are some of the unreasonable views that are politically mandated?APR 6, 4:10PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The primary examples of such truths have to do with institutional titles and

with artificial ranking systems. We are told that people who are 'psychiatrists'

or 'licensed therapists' are knowledgeable about human nature. And we are

expected to defer to their views. But their views oftentimes are not those of

people who are knowledgeable or intelligent aobut people. And people who

are supposedly experts on human nature are often not only not experts on it,

but are singularly obtuse about it. We are told that peole who have certain

kinds of degrees are experts on economics or anthropology or even art or

music, and we are expected to defer to such people, even in the absence of

any actual evidence of ability. In today's world, there are so many

bureaucratic horizons that one must cross, so many fake titles and credentials

that one has to get to be 'official', that people's views about others are less

hewed to realities than they are to be bureaucratic pseudo-realities--to what

are basically institutional lies and fairy tales. And when one replaces respect

for the truth with respect for institutional pseudo-truth, or with any other kind

of non-truth, one becomes a psychopath.

APR 6, 4:54PM EDT0

KSENIA25

Are psychopaths more common in certain parts of the world compared

to others?

APR 6, 7:24AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKIYes, psychopaths are dramatically less common in China and Japan than they

are in the USA. In countries where traditional values predominate,

psychopathy is relatively uncommon; and in countries where it is permissible

to pick and choose among values, and therefore to decide not to have at all, it

is dramatically more common. Also, psychopathy is very highly associated

with the breakdown of the family unit: where families are not intact, there is

almost always some psychopathy. This is because one's conscience has its

roots in one's feelings towards family members, especially parents. And in

the United States, with its glorification of the 'single mom' and its low regard

for the family unit, psychopathy is therefore rampant. Finally, the United

States has always strongly encourage entrepreneurialism and individualism,

especially in regards to economic matters. And in and of itself, this is

extremel good. But where there is entrepreneurialism, there is also, almost by

necessity, the pseudo-entrepreneurialism of the conman, the grifter, the

psychopath.

Last edited @ Apr 6, 1:39PM EDT.

APR 6, 1:35PM EDT0

TRACY_SHISH

What other personality traits go hand in hand with psychopathy?

APR 6, 6:58AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Psychopaths tend to be glib---they talk fast and loose, often having a

tendency to 'jabber.' They are evasive, very hard to pin down, oftentimes

slick and slippery. They interact with the world through carefully constructed

personae, sometimes appearing jovial and light-hearted, sometimes appearing

duly grave and serious, sometimes appearing to be concerned with other

people's welfare. But their personae are easily penetrated, especially by

people who don't have anything to gain by believing in them. With the

psychopaths that I have personally known, I noticed that, despite an

appearance of brilliance, their lives ended up being very mediocre. Thereseemed to be a lot of incoherent efforts, each of which seemed brilliant when

considered on its own, but which, taken collectively, did not add up to

anything. But mainly they are slick and shallow. They often play 'shell

games', 'bait and switch' games, sometimes literally, as with those people who

play Three Card Monty on the street corner, and more often figuratively, as

with the person who always has a number of different stories going.

Psychopaths will say anything; their stories will vary from person to person;

when they speak, it is not to speak the truth, but is rather for reasons of

convenience and momentary gain. The academic world, particularly some of

the softer branches of it, are loaded with psychopaths. 

APR 6, 1:48PM EDT0

LUISARGUELLES

Who are some of the famous psychopaths in history?

APR 6, 5:18AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Mao Tse Tung was a psychopath. Jim Jones, of the Jonestown Massacre, was

a psychopath. I believe (though this is not clear) that Bill Clinton was a

psychopath. The Hippie Movement was (and is) replete with psychopaths,

e.g. Ira Einhorn, who murdered his girlfriend (also a psychopath) and kept

her mummified corpse in his closet for two years. Many 'avante guarde'

intelletuals, such as Foucault, are, I believe, psychopaths. 

APR 6, 1:42PM EDT0








AMAN MAMODIA

What should a psychopath do to get help?APR 6, 2:00AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

They have no desire to change, and they cannot change. They may pretend to

change. But if they go to a therapist, it is always for some underhanded

reason. Sometimes they want to learn about psychology from the therapist.

Sometimes they simply enjoy toying with the therapist. Sometimes it is 

comply with a court-order. But it is never for a legitimate reason.

Psychopathy is not an affliction so much as it is a kind of psychological

struture. And the elimination of psychopathology is possible only when it is

internal to the structure of the patient's personality; that structure cannot itself

undergo change. And for someone to cease to be a psychopath, it would have

to change. 

Last edited @ Apr 6, 2:23AM EDT.

APR 6, 2:21AM EDT0

BOOKS.OF.JOY

Do you know any psychopaths personally in real life?

APR 6, 12:17AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Many. And so do you.

APR 6, 2:00AM EDT0

TOSHA

Are men more prone to becoming psychopaths than women?

APR 5, 11:57PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

No. Men and women are equally likely to become psychopaths. When people

become psychopaths, their psychopath-identities mold themselves around

their genders and sexual orientations. So male psychopaths are likely to be

financial fraudsters, and female psychopaths are likely to be prostitutes. But

psychopathy is an equal-gender employer. There may be some 'statistics' to

the effect that men are more likely to be psychopaths. But this is not the case.

Men, when psychopaths, are more likely than women to be psychopathic in

an overtly criminal way. But the rates of psychopathy between the genders

are the same.

Last edited @ Apr 6, 12:11AM EDT.

APR 6, 12:09AM EDT0

DIANACHAIKA

Can you recommend any good books about psychopaths?

APR 5, 11:14PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The Mask of Sanity, by Hervey Cleckley (non-fiction), and The Incredible

Charlie Carewe (fiction). I do not recommend "Without Conscience" by

Hare, which is pop psychology and, in addition to being shallow, is largely

ripped off, sans acknowledgement, from Cleckley. 

APR 5, 11:23PM EDT0

IZABELABAR

What are the human values that differentiate a psychopath and a non-

psychopath?APR 5, 10:56PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The psychopath has no real values. He has pseudo-values: he hyper-values

externalities--money, flash, glamor. He 'values' manipulating and defrauding.

But his 'values' are anti-values: they are assaults against actual values. Actual

values, when complied with, conduce to human growth and development, A

psychopath's pseudo-values, when complied with, undermine humanity. 

APR 5, 11:22PM EDT0

NADYAWYN

Can someone become a psychopath when they are elderly, for example,

over 80 years old?

APR 5, 10:52PM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

When a person betrays what is most important to him, he dies inside and he

effectively psychopathizes. And this can happen at any point in life. I have

seen it happen in people in their 70s. 

APR 5, 11:20PM EDT0

MADADAVID

Why is psychopathy rapidly spreading in today's world?

APR 5, 4:40PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

It is spreading because bureaucracy is spreading. And bureaucracy is

inherently psychopathic. It is psychopathic because it is phony, and

psychopathy is about phoniness. (People think that psychopathy is about evil-

-and it is. But it is primarily about phoniness, and only secondarily about

evil.)

APR 5, 4:44PM EDT0

MUIA

Does social media play a role in psychopathy?

APR 5, 11:59AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I think that social media can actually have a counter-psychopathic function. I

know that right now a lot of my friendships are based on social media---

mainly on my YouTube channel and on my podcast. I am able to have

exchanges through social media that are much more honest, and therefore

less psychopathic, than the exchanges that I can have elsewhere. And I am

not alone in this. Obviously social media can be used psychopathically; it can

be used psychopathically--it can be used to construct false identifies and to

manipulate people. And it is used in these ways. But on the whole I would

say that social media actually provides an outlet for the non-psychopathic

side of humanity.

APR 5, 4:10PM EDT0

GEEKEEMELOGY

Have you watched any movies or films about psychopaths? Which one isyour favourite?

APR 5, 4:52AM EDT0








JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Yes, I have seen many. The most accurate depiction of a psychopath that I

can think of off hand is a movied called "Pacific Heights", with Michael

Keaton. An utterly, completely accurate depiction of a psychopath is in an

episode of the show Six Feet Under, titled "That's My Dog", where David

picks up a hitchiker, who abducts him. If you want to know what a pure

example of a psychopath is, watch that episode. Another less realistic but not

totally unrealistic depiction of a psychopath is the main character in the

movie "The Stepfather." 

APR 5, 5:05AM EDT0

TOP 5 FROM John-Michael Kuczynski

                                            1

Ask me anything about Psychopathy!

#HealthAMA

 116

 120

                                            2

Ask Me Anything about Philosophypedia!

#BusinessAMA

 54

 116

                                            3

Ask Me Anything about Psychopathy!#HealthAMA

 79

 107

                                            4

Ask me anything about philosophy, psychoanalysis or logic.

#StartupAMA

 51

 105

                                            5

Ask me anything about OCD!

#AuthorsAMA

 59

 104

TOP CONTRIBUTOR


Link to Video Version of book: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8XbvlQJohdA