                                      Determinism, Freedom, Psychopathy



                                              J.-M. Kuczynski, PhD




      1.0 Determinism in relation to the debate between materialism and

dualism


      2.0 Free will in an indeterministic world?


      3.0 Free will in a dualistic world?


      4.0 The Compatibilist Conception of Freedom


      4.1 Locke’s compatibilism


      4.1.1 G.E. Moore’s compatibilism


      4.1.2 A Lockean counter-objection


      4.1.3 An oversight on Chisholm’s part


      4.1.4 Frankfurt’s refutation of Moore: why “x acted freely” ≠ “x could

have done otherwise”


      4.1.5 The irrelevance of Frankfurt’s refutation of the counterfactual

analysis of freedom


      4.1.6 Freedom not a property of choices


      5.0 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom


      5.1 Frankfurt’s emendation of this analysis


      5.2 Freedom as self-determination


      5.3. Frankfurt's analysis systemically flawed      6.0   Ego-dystonic vs. ego-syntonic causes


      6.1 A point concerning mental illness


      7.0 An as of yet unidentified problem with Frankfurt's analysis


      7.1 Second order desires sometimes are the puppets of first order

desires


      7.2  Fake freedom: The warping of one’s higher-order desires to

make them validate one’s lower-order desires


      8.0  Values ≠ desires


      8.1 Free acts as value-driven acts


      8.2 Some general facts relating to the nature of values


      8.3 What are values?


      8.3.1 Interlude: An objection to the point just made


      8.3.2 What are values? (revisited)


      8.3.3 What are values? (further continued)


      8.4.0 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s

analysis of moral value


      8.4.1 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s

analysis of moral value (continued)


      8.5. An objection to our analysis of what values are


      9.0 Minds ≠ Selves


      9.1 Selves as minds that have values


      9.2 Self-consciousness and self-determination      9.3 Actions as value-driven reactions


      10.0 Co-corporeal, psychologically integrated mental states enough

for a mind but not for a self


      10.1 Psychological integrity a prerequisite for moral integrity


      10.2 Minds that are selves and minds that are not


      11.0 How minds become selves


      12.0 The concept of intrinsic value in relation to the concept of

selfhood


      12.1 Some preliminaries


      12.2 Two Illustrations of Our Thesis that what is Valuable is what

consolidates one's Agency


      12.3 Selfhood a matter of degree


      13.0 The identity-theoretic underpinnings of the concept of

psychopathy


      14.0 Desires vs. values


      14.1 Desires vs. values (continued)


        14.1.1 Desires vs. values (continued)


      15.0 These points in relation to psychopathy


      15.1 These points in relation to psychopathy (continued)


      15.2 Who does the psychopath fool?


      16.0 Sociopathy vs. psychopathy vs. non-sociopathic, non-

psychopathic criminality


      16.1 Why psychopaths are dysfunctional        16.1.1 Why psychopaths are dysfunctional (continued)


      16.2 The psychopath's veneer of intelligence


      16.3 The reverence that people have for psychopaths


      16.4 Psychopaths have minds, but not selves: the psychopath’s non-

Frankfurtian psychological architecture


      16.4 Psychopaths are legion


      17.0 Sociopathy vs. Psychopathy


      17.1 Rationalization: The gateway to sociopathy


        17.1.1  Rationalization: The gateway to sociopathy (continued)


        17.1.2  Rationalizing easier than not rationalizing


      17.2. Why rationalization is inevitable and often healthy


      17.3 When rationalization is not healthy


      17.4 Sociopaths incessantly moralize


      17.5  Vampirism as a metaphor for sociopathy


      17.6  What kind of person is the sociopath?


      17.7  Fame in connection with sociopathy


      18.0 The non-sociopathic/non-psychopathic predator


      18.1 The non-sociopathic/non-psychopathic predator (continued)


      18.2 Criminalization as a way of avoiding sociopathization


      18.3 Donald Davison’s analysis of what intentions are


      18.4 Donald Davison’s analysis of what intentions are (continued)      18.5 Nietzsche’s ethical egoism: An exhortation to avoid sociopathy


      18.6  Ira Einhorn and other famous psychopaths


        18.6.1 Wittgenstein


        18.6.2 Foucault




      1.0 Determinism in relation to the debate between materialism and

dualism




  An  event-system  is  deterministic  if  it  obeys  laws  that,  given  the

system’s state at any given point in time, fix the system’s state at all later

points in time. The physical world is a deterministic system. (In any case, it’s

very nearly so. And in this context, we’ll assume that it is. Later, we’ll drop

the assumption.) This means that the world itself is a deterministic system to

the extent that it’s physical.



        There are both physical and mental entities. Anything that involves

thought or feeling is mental; anything that does not (but is spatiotemporal;

i.e., is in space or time) is physical. So beliefs, intentions, and regrets are

mental; and rocks, trees, and explosions are physical.



      It is an open and delicate question how the mental and physical are

related. Some hold that mental entities are identical with certain physical

entities (presumably neural events or structures). This position is known as

materialism. Others deny this, saying that the mental is non-physical. This

position is known as dualism.



      If  materialism  is  right,  then  the  mental  world  is  just  part  of  the

physical world. So if E is some experience that you either have had, arehaving, or will have, then given the way the world was 10 million years ago,

the  state  of  the  universe  10  million  years  ago  made E’s  occurrence

inevitable. Whatever you decide to do today is an inevitable consequence of

the way the world was a million years ago.



        Supposing  that  the  physical  world  is  deterministic,  and  supposing

also that materialism is right, it’s hard to see how there could be free will. If

the state of the universe a million years ago completely settled what choices

I would make today, then presumably I couldn’t make any choices other

than  those  that  I do make.  And  it  would  seem  that,  under  those

circumstances, I don’t have anything resembling “freedom of choice.” In a

moment, we will find that some case can be made that one may have a kind

of freedom in a deterministic world. But let’s hold off on that for a moment

and  talk  right  now  about  the  relationship  between indeterminism  and

freedom.



      2.0 Free will in an indeterministic world?




   Because of the apparent irreconcilability of materialism with the

presumption that we are free, some believers in free will accept dualism,

                                                                      [1]
while others accept materialism but reject determinism. Let’s consider

both options, starting with the first.



      First of all, supposing that there is indeterminism in the world, it

doesn’t necessarily mean that our mental processes aren’t determined. If

the atomic processes making up some rock happen to be indeterministic,

that  doesn’t  mean  that  your  brain  or  mind  aren’t  deterministic.  So  the

indeterminism must be in the right place.



        What is that place? Where must the indeterminism be if our choices

are  to  be  made  freely?  The  indeterminism  must  relate  to  the  processesinvolved in making choices. For, if the mechanisms of which our choices are

results are deterministic, then our decisions are as determined as anything

else. Thus, a free person’s choices are undetermined.



      But  a  choice  that  isn’t  predetermined  by  anything  isn’t

predetermined by any facts about one’s personality, and a choice of the

latter kind is not one that we would have any inclination to regard as “free.”

A  short story  may  illustrate  my  meaning.  Smith  is  walking  along.  All  of  a

sudden,  he  decides  to  become  a  pilot.  This  decision  has  no  basis  in  his

personality. He never liked flying. He already has a career that he enjoys and he

depends on. So it would be inconvenient for him to become a pilot, and he

would derive no pleasure from it. He knows all of this. Nonetheless, he makes

this choice. It just comes out of the blue.



      Was this choice made freely? It doesn’t seem like it. It actually seems

rather compulsive—like  something  that  just  overcame  Smith.  Suppose  that

“choices”  similar  to  the  one  just  described  were  a  frequent  occurrence  in

Smith’s  psychological  life.  Would  we  say  that  Smith  was  “free”?  No.  We’d

describe him as having a kind of disorder. We’d describe the fact that he was

visited by these strange compulsions as indicative of a lack of psychological

integrity on his part; and see his submission to these forces as showing a lack of

freedom on his part. Smith is a puppet dancing at the end of strings pulled by

psychopathology.



      This suggests that, in order to be made “freely,” a choice has to be

rooted in facts about one’s personality, and must express one’s values, desires,

beliefs,  and  previous  intentions.  A  choice  that  lacks  these  roots  seems  to

involve a disintegration of the person’s psyche and, paradoxical though this

may seem, a consequent diminution of the subject’s freedom. So even if there

is indeterminism, it doesn’t help people be free; indeterminism actually seems

to hurt our chances of being free.



      But to the extent that a choice is appropriately rooted in a person’spersonality, that choice is not the result of indeterminism but, on the contrary,

of  a  deterministic  structure.  And  it’s  hard  to  see  how,  under  those

circumstances, we could be free. So we’re damned if we do and damned if we

don’t!



      3.0 Free will in a dualistic world?




      Now  let’s  consider  the  view  that,  although  the  physical  world  is

deterministic, the mental is not physical. First of all, even if the mental is not

physical, there is considerable evidence that the mental sphere is deterministic.

The decisions that one makes are clearly a product of one’s pre-existing mental

          [2]
condition.



      We  must  also  take  into  account  that,  at  least  according  to  some

viewpoints,  the  choices  we  make  have  extremely  deep  roots  in  our

unconscious mental lives. Analysis tends to suggest that decisions that seem, at

the level of consciousness, to be “random” are, in fact, strictly determined by

unconscious forces. In any case, this is one point of view, and it is one for which

there is some corroboration.



      But suppose, if only for argument’s sake, that your choices were not

fixed by the state of the universe prior to their occurrence. For the reasons

given earlier, that wouldn’t make those choices be free. On the contrary, it

would make them more like fits or seizures than like considered, freely made

judgments.



      A story similar to the one just told may help make this clear. You are a

student at State University. You have an A-average. All of a sudden, you choose

to drop out of college and become a drug dealer. Your choice was not caused to

occur by anything; the state of your personality prior to the choice had nothing

to do with your making it, and neither did the state of the universe. It justhappened. So, in the middle of a test, you throw down your pen, bolt out of the

room, and get to work as a drug dealer.



      Does this sound like a freely made choice? No. It sounds more like a

compulsion. It’s as though you were “taken over” by another person and lost

control of your body. Again, we see that indeterminism doesn’t help freedom

and actually undermines it.



      4.0 The Compatibilist Conception of Freedom




      The problem is that, as we saw, determinism also seems to threaten

freedom. Obviously you have no control over the past. If determinism is right,

then  what  happened  in  the  past  completely  determines  exactly  what’s

happening  in  the  present  and,  in  particular,  completely  fixes  what  choices

you’re making now. So something over which you have no control is completely

responsible for the choices that you’re making. It’s hard to see how, under

these circumstances, you could be said to have free will.



        Nonetheless, some hold that there can be free will in a deterministic

world.  Such  people  are  known  as compatibilists. Those  who  deny  it  are

incompatibilists.



      4.1 Locke’s compatibilism



          There are ultimately two different forms of compatibilism. One of

these is very straightforward; the other is quite sophisticated.



        According to the straightforward version, which we’ll discuss in this

section, you are free to the extent that you can do what you want, and youare unfree to the extent that you cannot. If you want to leave your room

and you can, you are free. (In any case, you’re free in that respect. You may

be unfree in other respects; e.g., once you leave the room, you may want to

leave the house you’re in but not be able to.) According to the other version

of compatibilism, which we’ll discuss in Section 4.2, being able to do what

you want, though necessary for freedom, isn’t sufficient for it. It is necessary

                                                                                      [3]
also that your choices be adequately rooted in who you are as a person.



      4.1.1 G.E. Moore’s compatibilism




                                                      [4] 
 According to G.E. Moore (1873–1958),an act is performed freely

if the agent would have done something else if he had chosen to do so. An

act is free if the agent “could have done otherwise.”



      The idea is pretty straightforward. Although I’m considering striking

Harry,  I  choose  not  to.  But,  immediately  upon  making  that  choice,  an

extremely strong person grabs my arm and forces me to hit Harry. My act

was clearly unfree. But why? Because, says Moore, even though I chose to

do otherwise, I ended up striking Harry. Now suppose that I voluntarily strike

Harry. I do it, not because somebody forces me to, but because I don’t like

Harry and want him to suffer. In this case, my act is free. But why? Because,

says Moore, if I hadn’t chosen to strike Harry, I wouldn’t have done so. Thus,

my striking Harry is voluntary, Moore says, iff I wouldn’t have done so had I

chosen not to do so.



        Moore’s position is a form of compatibilism. Free acts aren’t those

that are uncaused; they’re those that are caused in a certain way—they’re

those that are caused by decisions on the part of the people (or animals)

who commit them.      4.1.2 Chisholm’s objection to Moore’s analysis



    In Human Freedom and the Self, Roderick Chisholm (1916–1999)

makes a compelling objection to this analysis. Let’s suppose that, if I had

chosen not to strike Harry, I would indeed have refrained from doing so.

                                          [5] 
Unless I was at liberty to not makethat choice, it’s hard to see how my

doing so was free. If every choice I make is inevitable, then it’s irrelevant

that,  had  I  made  different  choices,  I  would  have  acted  differently.  For  I

couldn’t have  made  those  choices  under  those  circumstances,  and  I

therefore couldn’t have acted in those ways. And if I couldn’t have acted in

those  ways,  then  I  couldn’t  have  done  anything  other  than  what  I  did,

making it hard to see how, in acting as I did, I was acting freely.



      4.1.2 A Lockean counter-objection



        Though  powerful,  Chisholm's  point  involves  a  serious  confusion,

which  may  undermine  it.  We  won't  identify  that  confusion  until  Section

4.1.5,  since  we  haven’t  yet  covered  some  of  the  material  that  must  be

absorbed to understand it.



         Right now we will concentrate on a point made by John Locke

(1632–1704), who held a view similar to Moore’s, that either refutes, or

                                                    [6] 
comes close to refuting, Chisholm’s analysis.In Locke’s view, freedom is a

property  of actions. It  makes  no  sense  to  speak  of  anything  other  than

actions as being free. Only things that one can intend to do are done freely. I

can intend to do 20 push-ups, and that’s why I can do it freely. But I can’t

intend to make a certain choice. What would it be to intend to make a

certain choice (e.g., to intend to do 20 push-ups)? If I really intend to choose

to do 20 push-ups, then, for that very reason, I have chosen to do 20 push-

ups. Second-order intentions (intentions to intend) collapse into first-order

intentions. Thus, so far as it isn’t a pleonasm, the expression “intentionalchoice” is meaningless.



        Locke has surely identified one kind of freedom or---what, as we’ll

now see, is probably more accurate---an essential component of one kind of

freedom. But the following scenario suggests:



                  (i) that Locke’s analysis, though certainly a part of

        the truth, is not the whole of it;



                  (ii) that, although Locke’s analysis may well partially

        undermine  Chisholm’s  analysis,  it  doesn’t  do  so

          completely;



      and, finally,



                  (iii)  that  Chisholm’s  has  shown  that  the  concept

          associated  by  the  lay-person  with  the  term  “free”  is

          incoherent and, moreover, that the same is true, though

        not for the same reasons, with Locke’s attempt to remove

        the  incoherencies  from  that  concept  (while  leaving  it

          otherwise unchanged).



        A story will clarify these points. 



 On Monday, you undergo hypnosis. You do so because you believe

that it will help you kick your addiction to nicotine. While under hypnosis,

the hypnotist, who is a prankster and loves to abuse the power he has over

his subjects, tells you that, on Wednesday, you should choose to put on a

tin-foil hat, go into your boss’s office, and tell him that aliens are about take

over  the  Earth.  On  Wednesday,  you  choose  to  do  these  things.  So  you

voluntarily put on a tin-foil hat, etc.      Your  act  was  voluntary.  You  chose  to  do  it.  But  was  it  free?  My

opinion:  there  was a sense  in  which  it  was  free,  but  there  was  also  an

important sense in which it was not free. You are not, by virtue of choosing

to engage in this odd behavior, in the same category as somebody who

wants to walk to his car but is physically restrained. But, for reasons that are

not immediately obvious but that we will now try to elucidate, your behavior

is either unfree or free only in some attenuated sense.



      One way of interpreting what Chisholm is saying is as follows:



                  (CR)  There  is  only  one  significant  difference

          between, on the one hand, your voluntary decision to don

        a  tin-foil  hat,  etc.  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  ‘normal’

          decision (e.g., a decision to play tennis made by somebody

        whose choice isn’t the result of hypnotic suggestion or any

        other  comparable  event).  The  difference  in  question  is

        that, whereas your decision was implanted in you by some

          sentient being, the tennis-player’s decision was implanted

        in him by impersonal forces. But does that really make a

        difference? To be sure, your decision (to put on a tin-foil

        hat, etc.) is the result of malfeasance on somebody’s part,

          whereas  the  tennis-player’s  decision  is  not.  So,  from  a

        moral  perspective,  there  are  important  differences

        between the two situations. But, when evaluating whether

        a  person’s  decision  to  do X  is  free,  what  is  relevant  is

          whether that person had control over the forces leading to

        that decision; it’s irrelevant what sort of morality, if any,

        those forces embodied.



                    An adaptation of the story told a moment ago

        (about the hypnotist) makes this clear. One day, while you

        are snoozing under a coconut tree, a coconut falls on your

        head.  The  resulting  brain-disturbances  lead  to  your          deciding to put on a tin-foil hat, go into your boss’s office,

        etc. Surely your decision to do this---though voluntary, and

        though not the product of malfeasance on anyone’s part---

        is unfree or, at best, is free only in some reduced sense. So

          Locke’s thesis (“an act is free iff it’s voluntary”) isn’t correct

        and must either be rejected or at least heavily qualified.    



      4.1.3 An oversight on Chisholm’s part



        Partly for the reasons just given, and partly for reasons to be stated

in  Section  5.0-5.01,  Locke’s  analysis  is  inadequate;  and  to  that  extent,

Chisholm is right. But Chisholm’s analysis involves a subtle but important

confusion.  Because  it  involves  this  confusion,  Chisholm’s  analysis  fails  to

show  that  actions  cannot  be  free.  (However,  despite  its  involving  this

confusion, Chisholm’s analysis---or, rather, the extension of it put forth in

the previous section---does successfully undermine Locke’s position.)



        Let t be some instant in the year 50,000 B.C., and let t* some

                  st
instant in the 21 century. Suppose that, at t*, Smith decides to go for a jog.

Bearing this in mind, consider the following two statements:



                  (1) The state of the universe at time t compelled

        Smith to decide to go for a jog at time t*.



                  (2)  The  state  of  the  universe  at  time t  made  it

          inevitable  that,  approximately  52,000  years  later,  Smith

        would  come  into  existence  a  few  years  prior  to t* and,

          because of the combined effects of his pre-t* experiences

        and his native constitution, would decide at time t* to go

        for a jog.  (1) entails that, given the state of the universe at t, it was nomically

impossible (i.e., prohibited by natural law) for Smith not to decide to go for a

jog at t*; and (2) also entails this. But there is a difference between (1) and

(2). (1) says that the state of the universe at t compelled Smith to make a

certain decision. (2) doesn’t say this. It says that it was inevitable that he

would decide at t* to for a jog. But that's compatible with his not being

compelled at t* to decide to go for a jog. It's inevitable that I will choose to

have a meal in the next 12 hours; but that doesn't mean that my decision to

eat isn't free.  Rational people freely but inevitably choose to act in certain

ways.



          Here’s a case of Smith’s being compelled to behave in a certain

way. A very strong person takes hold of Smith’s arms and, despite Smith’s

valiant resistance, makes Smith hit himself with his own hands (or, what is

probably a more accurate way of putting it, hits Smith with Smith’s own

hands).  Why  is  it  that,  in  this  case,  Smith’s  behavior  is  the  result  of

compulsion?  Because  the  immediate  causes  of  that  behavior  were  not

Smith-internal.  The  forces  that  led  to  Smith’s  arm-movements  were  not

constitutive  of  Smith;  they  failed  to  be  Smith-constitutive  even  in  the

attenuated sense in which an impulse is constitutive of a person of a person

who regards that impulse as having no value, having thus made every effort

to dissociate himself from it, and to which he therefore gives no weight

when making decisions.



     Even though (2) is to the effect that it is compulsory that Smith

come  into  existence  and,  in  due  course,  do  such  and  such,  (2)  is  quite

consistent  with Smith’s  never  being  compelled  in  any  way.  For  (2)  is

consistent with the proposition that the thing that is being compelled is the

universe, not Smith, and that what the universe is being compelled to do is

to produce a being, namely Smith, who will decide at t* to go jogging, and

whose decision to do so, having for its proximal cause, a conglomerate of

Smith-constitutive  forces,  is  not  compelled---at  least  not  in  the  sense  in

which, in the other story, Smith was compelled to hit himself and, indeed,

not in any ordinary sense of the word  “compelled.”     A continuation of our story will help us move forward. The state of

the universe at t makes it necessary, as a matter of natural law, that Smith

come into existence, that he have thus and such thoughts, feelings, beliefs,

etc.  and  that,  at  time t*,  he  decide  to  go  jogging.  But  the  state  of  the

universe makes it inevitable that Smith’s decision to go jogging be the result

of  forces  that make  up  Smith. Obviously  Smith’s  decision  will  reflect  his

beliefs concerning the external world; and those believes are obviously, in

part, the results of events (collisions of photons with Smith’s eyes, etc.) over

which Smith has no control. But these Smith-non-constitutive events caused

Smith to choose to go jogging only by way of Smith-constitutive forces---by

way of Smith’s preferences acting in conjunction with Smith’s beliefs. So,

ultimately, nothing that wasn’t Smith-constitutive made Smith do anything.

The  only  thing  that  made  Smith  go  jogging  was  Smith  himself.  So,  even

though natural law made it inevitable that Smith would come into existence

and, at time t*, decide to go jogging, the way in which natural law made that

inevitable didn’t involve Smith’s being compelled. It involved the world’s

being compelled to produce a person (Smith) whose own self was the sole

(proximal) cause of his choice and who therefore freely went jogging. So (2)

is compatible with the following proposition:



                  (2*)  Given  the  state  of  the  universe  at t,  it  was

          necessary, for reasons of natural law, that the universe be

          compelled to produce a person (Smith) who, at time t*,

        freely went jogging.



       If you were the sole immediate cause of some action of yours,

then you acted freely. It may be that your existence, along with everything

you think and feel (etc.), is the inevitable result of how the world was before

you  were  born.  But,  by  virtue  of  producing  you,  the  world  was  not

compelling you to do (or be) anything. There was no you to compel. (In

producing somebody, you are not compelling them to exist. In conceiving a

child,  you  are  not compelling that  child  to  exist.  The  child  isn’t  yet  in

existence  and  therefore  isn’t  there  to  be  compelled.  What  is  being

compelled is the coming into existence of that child. The universe is beingcompelled, by your carnal acts, to create junior. But junior himself isn’t in

any way being compelled, at least not by virtue of being conceived, since

what doesn’t exist can’t be compelled.)



        And once you are in existence, your actions are free if their

causes are forces that are constitutive of you. For so far as your deeds result

from such forces, they result from you: you are the author of those actions.

And  even  though  the  state  of  the  universe  prior  to  your  birth  made  it

inevitable that you would exist to perform those actions, it did not (setting

aside cases where forces not constitutive of you;, e.g., a bully’s arm-twisting,

are the proximal causes of your behavior) compel you to perform those

actions.  Rather,  the  state  of  the  universe  prior  to  your  birth  compelled

events to produce a person (you) who (setting aside bully-caused behaviors,

etc.) would freely perform various acts.    



          4.1.4 Frankfurt’s refutation of Moore: why “x acted freely” ≠ “x

could have done otherwise”




  Harry  Frankfurt  (1929–)  decisively  demonstrated  the  falsity  of

Moore’s position by identifying scenarios in which somebody performs some

act  freely  even  though  that  person  could not have  abstained  from

                      [7] 
performing that act.Here is such a scenario:



                  (SM) Mr. Smith intends to kill Mr. Jones. Like Mr.

        Smith, Mrs. Green also wants Mr. Jones dead. But Smith

        doesn’t  want  to  go  to  jail  for  murder.  Without  Smith’s

          knowing it, Mrs. Green installs a microchip in his cranium.

        (We needn’t worry about how exactly she does this or how

        exactly the microchip works.) By means of this microchip,

        she  can  control  Smith’s  actions—she  can  make  him  do

          whatever  she  wants.  She  knows  that  Smith  is  intent  on        killing Jones. But if Smith should get cold feet, Mrs. Green

        will use the microchip to force Smith to go through with it.

        Smith doesn’t know about the microchip; nor does he even

        know of Green’s existence. Smith kills Jones—he doesn’t

        chicken out at the last minute. And he does so freely (at

        least insofar as anyone does anything freely—he is not in

        the grips of any delusions, or compulsions, etc.).



      Thus,  Smith  freely  kills  Jones,  even  though  Smith  could  not  have

done otherwise. For, had he decided at the last minute not to kill Jones,

Green would have forced him to.



        Hence, contrary to what Moore alleges, “x performs act A freely” is

not equivalent with “x does A and, had x chosen not to do A, x would not

have done A.”



      4.1.5 The irrelevance of Frankfurt’s refutation of the counterfactual

analysis of freedom




      But even though, interpreted narrowly, Moore’s analysis is false, it’s

really  just  a  misguided  way  of  stating  the  principle,  which  Frankfurt’s

argument does nothing to undermine, that a free act is one that is choice-

driven. Moore was led to equate “x acted freely” with “x could have done

otherwise” not by a misconception concerning the nature of freedom, but

by  his  acceptance  of  a  certain  analysis  of  causality—the  so-called

“counterfactual analysis of causality” (CFA). According to CFA, x caused y to

occur just in case if x hadn’t happened, y wouldn’t have happened. “Smith’s

pushing the button caused the elevator to come” means the same thing as

“if Smith hadn’t pushed the button, the elevator wouldn’t have come.”



      CFA  is  wrong.  This  is  because  there  is  causal  redundancy  in  theworld. I push the elevator button, causing the elevator to come; but if I

hadn’t pushed it, one of the other 20 people waiting for it would have done

so, and the elevator would have come.



      But a close cousin of CFA is correct, namely:



                  (CFA*) x caused y to occur just in case, if x hadn’t

          happened, then ceteris paribus y wouldn’t have happened.



            Similarly, even though, for the reasons just given:



                  (PAP) “x  did A  freely  if  and  only  if x  did A  and,

        further, had x chosen not to do A, x wouldn’t have done A,”



      is false, nonetheless:



                  (PAP*) “x did A freely if and only if x did A and,

        further, had x chosen not to do A, then ceteris paribus x

          wouldn’t have done A,”



      is correct.



      It’s well known that, if they are to come out correct, counterfactuals

typically have to be hedged with ceteris paribus clauses. Even though:



                  (JFK)  “If  JFK  hadn’t  been  assassinated,  he  would

        have been re-elected,”



      is  a  plausible  counterfactual,  it  isn’t  necessarily  true.  What  if,sometime  after  Nov.  22,  1963,  but  before  the  ‘64  elections,  JFK  died  of

natural causes or was disgraced by some scandal? In that case, he would not

have been re-elected. So the right counterfactual is:



                  (JFK*) “If JFK hadn’t been assassinated, then ceteris

        paribus he would have been re-elected.”



      In other words, if JFK hadn’t been assassinated, but otherwise things

were the same, so that JFK was healthy and popular, etc., then he would

                        [8]
have been re-elected.



            Notice that JFK* is really a causal claim, since it’s just another way

  of saying:



                  (JFK#)  “JFK’s  being  assassinated  caused  an

          otherwise re-election-bound JFK to not be re-elected.”



                                                                [9] 
      As a rule, counterfactuals are causal claims.Thus, “Smith killed

Jones freely” is true just in case (i) Smith killed Jones and (ii) if Smith had

chosen not to kill Jones, then ceteris paribus Smith would have not killed

Jones.



        Basically,  Smith  killed  Jones  freely  if  his  doing  so  expressed  his

decision to do so, as opposed to some other force. In general:



                      [10]
                  (FA) an act is free if it expresses one’s decision

        to act that way.



            This is clearly the right analysis of a kind of freedom or---what  may be a more accurate way of putting it---a certain aspect of freedom.



      4.1.6 Freedom not a property of choices




      If FA is right, acts are free, not choices. This is what Locke held. Locke

was the first advocate of FA, and he was an exceptionally effective one. One

chooses to act, Locke said; one doesn’t choose to choose. It makes no sense

to suppose that one chooses to choose. For if one always chose what to

choose, Locke points out, one would have to make infinitely many choices in

order to make a single one, and one therefore couldn’t make any choices at

all.  In  order  to  choose  to  open  the  door,  one  would  have  to  choose  to

choose to open the door; and in order to choose to choose to open the

door, one would have to choose to choose to choose to open the door; and

so on.



      So freedom is freedom to act, not freedom to choose. As Locke puts

it,  freedom  is  a  relationship  between  choice  and  act,  and  not  between

subject and choice.



      It follows that, so far as one’s freedom is concerned, it is irrelevant

whether one’s choices are caused or not. Since freedom is a relationship

between choices and acts, not between choices and their own antecedents,

it doesn’t matter whether choices are caused. Nor, therefore, does it matter

how they’re caused.



      In  fact,  if  FA  is  right,  determinism  is  not  only  compatible  with

freedom, but is a prerequisite for it. Wanting to make the elevator come to

your floor, you intend to push the button. If a degenerative neurological

condition has undermined the integrity of the mechanisms linking your brain

to your hand, thereby making them indeterministic, your intention to move

your hand may be more likely to fail than to succeed. And, supposing thatyou do manage to push the button, if the mechanisms linking the button to

the elevator are indeterministic, your pushing the button may be more likely

than  not  to  fail  to  get  the  elevator  to  come.  To  the  extent  that  the

mechanisms  involved  in  the  implementation  of  our  choices  are

indeterministic,  we  are  in  the  grim  position  of  somebody  who  has

Parkinson’s. The spirit is willing, but the flesh can’t be counted on to obey,

and neither can the relevant mechanisms in the external world.




                                                  [11]
      5.0 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom




       According to Locke, you are free to the extent that you can do

what you want to do, and you are unfree to the extent that you cannot. This

is obviously a kind of freedom—a very important kind.



      But it isn’t the only kind. Contrary to what Locke says, there is a

sense in which choices can be free or unfree. Harry Frankfurt made this

    [12] 
clear.A  story  will  help  us  begin  to  understand  Frankfurt’s  insightful

analysis of freedom.



      Jones  is  a  great  writer  who  is  addicted  to  heroin.  Because  his

addiction is only moderate, he is able to function perfectly well even when

he is heroin-deprived. (When heroin-deprived, he doesn’t feel good, but he

is in no way incapacitated.) He knows that, if he were to shoot up right now,

the subsequent lethargy would make it impossible for him to write a single

word for the rest of the day. He also knows that, if he doesn’t write 10 pages

today,  he  will  lose  his  book  contract.  Jones  does  not  want  to  lose  the

contract. Plus, he wants to grow as a writer, which he won’t do, at least not

today, if he shoots up. He thus has a desire to not take the heroin—even

though he simultaneously has a desire to take the heroin.        Jones’ desire to take heroin is a first-order desire. Jones’ desire not to

act on this desire is a second-order desire. This is because Jones’ desire not

to take heroin is a desire as to what to do with another desire; it is a desire

not to cave in to a desire to take heroin.



        Suppose that Jones caves in and he takes the heroin. In that case,

Jones is a slave to his desires. His will has been compromised. He is not

acting freely.



      But now suppose  that  Jones  does not cave  in.  He  does  the  right

thing: instead of taking the heroin, he endures the discomfort of a heroin-

free day and manages to get his work done. In this context, Jones is not a

slave to his desires. His will has not been bent. His conduct expresses a “free

will.”



      In  light  of  considerations  such  as  these,  Frankfurt  says  that

somebody  has  a  free  will  to  the  extent  that  his  conduct  aligns  with  his

second-order desires.



      But here a question arises. Why are second-order desires so special?

Why is it that freedom consists in one's doing the bidding of one’s second-

order  desires—as  opposed  to  one’s  third-order,  or  fourth-order,  or  first-

order desires? What, in this context, is so special about the number two?



      When the heroin-addicted writer decides not to take heroin, what is

driving him is a rational appraisal of his situation. But when the heroin-

addicted  writer  gives  in  to  his  addiction,  it  is not his  rationality  (or  his

morality) that is driving him.



      Before  we  can  close  this  argument,  we  must  address  Frankfurt’s

discussion of the concept of a “person.” By a “person,” Frankfurt does notmean a member of the species homo sapiens. He means anything that has

the same basic psychological architecture that we have. What is so special

about  that  structure?  First  of  all,  we  are  self-conscious.  Second,  we  are

rational. Third, we are rational not only about how to attain our objectives,

but also about what those objectives should be. What distinguishes persons

from non-persons is that the former, but not the latter, subject their own

desires (and, more generally, their own mental states) to critical scrutiny.



        Non-persons are often very clever when it comes to figuring out how

to attain their objectives; for example, beavers show a lot of intelligence

when it comes to building dams. But they are not smart about whether they

should be building dams in the first place. The question doesn’t arise. They

have the desire, and they act on it (or they die trying). In general, persons

do,  whereas  non-persons  do  not,  subject  their  own  desires  to  rational

scrutiny.  Non-persons  do  not  ask  themselves:  “What  would  the

consequences of acting on this desire be? And should I act on this desire?”



      We persons, on the other hand, do subject our objectives to rational

assessment. And this is obviously made possible by the fact that we are self-

conscious. If I am overtaken by a desire to build a dam, I will ask myself:

“how would my acting on this desire help my overall interests?”



      We can now close the argument. Whenever someone is driven by a

rational assessment of their own desires, they are driven by a desire about a

desire. Thus, one is rational only to the extent that it is one’s second-order

desires that drive one’s conduct. There is a sense in which rational conduct

is free and in which irrational conduct is not.  



            To make it clear what this sense is, we must first distinguish

between  intelligent  conduct  and  rational  conduct.  An  irrational  act  can

involve an enormous amount of intelligence. Smith is a brilliant inventor. He

tries to impress his wife by building a giant robot that sings romantic songs

in a metallic voice. This alienates her and she divorces him. Moreover, thefinancial  and  personal  resources  he  sunk  into  this  project  have  left  him

destitute. Smith's act might have been about as intelligent as an act can be.

But it was not a rational act. For intelligently carried out though the act was,

the immediate object of that act (namely, the construction of a robot that

would sing love songs to his wife so that he’d be spared the trouble of doing

so)  was  not  intelligently  arrived  and  failed  to  embody  consideration  of

relevant facts that it was well within Smith’s ability to consider.



       A rational act is one that embodies due regard for one's various

interests. An irrational act is one that does not. An intelligent but impulsive

act (e.g., Smith's speedily building this robot to allay his rapidly growing

anxieties about his marital situation, all of which are projective but which

become legitimate as a result of this endeavor on his part) fails to embody

due  regard  for  one's  own  interests.  (Smith  isn't  taking  into  account  the

consequences  of  his  actions;  he  is  misdeploying  his  vast  stores  of

intelligence. And, granting that there are different kinds of intelligence, he

obviously has whatever kind of intelligence one needs to have to know that

(supposing  for  argument's  sake  that  there's  no  chance  that  this  project

would bring him to the attention of any potential benefactors) this project is

bound to land him on Skid Row.) So far as one is driven by first order desires,

one is neglecting to gratify one's second order desires. So, given that second

order desires are clearly more closely hewed to one's middle- and long-term

welfare---or, if it isn't one's own welfare that one cares about, one's middle-

and long-term situations---it is clearly more rational to act on one's second

than on one's first order desires. Also, to make a point we'll develop later, it

is often rational to perform actions in which, were one's first-order desires

allowed  to  discharge  themselves,  they'd  be  expressed. Too much  self-

restraint  is  dysfunctional  and,  in  addition  to  being  unpleasant,  seals  off

possible  well-springs  of  insight  and  creativity.  But,  setting  aside  cases  of

psychopathology, when a person performs one of these enjoyment-oriented

actions,  he  isn't  acting  on  an  impulse;  he's  acting  on  his approval of an

impulse. In other words, he's considered the impulse, determined that it

lines up with second order desires (or, what I believe to be different, his

values), and, on that basis, lifted the initial inhibition on his impulse. So,

while  the  resulting  action  may  be  indistinguishable  from  what  he  wouldhave done had the impulse itself been the proximal cause of his deeds, his

psychological condition, given that his action was not directly prompted by

that impulse, is radically different from what it would have been had that

                                [13]
action been thus prompted.



              Having distinguished between rational conduct and intelligent,

we may proceed with our discussion of Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom.



     There’s more to being free than being able to do what you want

to do. Your desires must reflect who you are. If they don’t, those desires

belong to you but aren’t of you. And in that case, you are alienated from

your own mental states, in much the way that a person with Parkinson’s is

alienated from his body.



  But  the  alienation  is  even  worse.  Involuntary  behavior  is

unintentional  behavior.  Intentional  behavior  is  voluntary  behavior.

Voluntary behavior is desire-driven behavior. (If you don’t want to raise your

arm, but it goes up anyway, you didn’t intend for it to happen.) Epileptic fits

are  not actions. Unintended  behaviors  are  not actions.. Unlike  actions,

they’re undergone, not done. So  estrangement  from  one’s  own  actions

amounts to estrangement from all of one’s own desires; and it’s hard to

imagine a condition less free than that.



      5.1 Frankfurt’s emendation of this analysis



        Another  story  will  help  expose  a  problem  with  the  analysis  of

freedom  just  described,  and  it  will  also  clarify  the  raison  d’être  for

Frankfurt’s soon to be discussed emendations of it.



        Smith’s  first-order  desires  are  seriously  out  of  alignment  with  hissecond. He values writing poetry; he’s good at it; and he enjoys it about as

much as it’s humanly possible to enjoy it. But he has a voracious craving for

drugs. His craving for drugs, especially cocaine, is unusually strong; and his

desire to write poetry, though intense, is not as intense as his desire to do

cocaine.



        Smith’s desire to do cocaine is out of alignment with many of his

values (second-order desires). Were he to give into this desire, he couldn’t

write poetry; nor could he maintain friendships or play sports or, with only a

few exceptions, do any of the other things he values. For this reason, he

doesn’t give in. But given how intense his craving is, every day is a struggle

for Smith. If, as Frankfurt suggests, one is free to the extent that one acts on

one’s second-order desires, Smith is as free as a person can be. But given

how  hard  life  is  for  Smith,  it’s  counterintuitive  to  suppose  that  he’s

maximally  free.  To  be  sure  he  has a  kind  of freedom,  and  he  has  it  in

abundance. But there’s some other sort of freedom that he doesn’t have.



        Frankfurt is aware of this problem, and he revises his view to deal

with it. According to his revised view, if an act is to be free, it is necessary

that it be driven by a second-order desire, but it isn’t sufficient. Another

condition must be met: one’s first-order desires must be consistent with the

second-order desires that are driving that act.



        Here’s the idea. Person X has no self-control. He binges on drugs and

food, and he hates himself for doing this; but he can’t stop—he’s too weak

and his urges are too strong. His life has no meaning and he knows it; but he

will not, or cannot, do anything about it. Unlike X, Person Y has a huge

amount of self-control and never caves into temptation. But everything is a

struggle, since he’s always fighting temptation, like a drowning man trying to

stay afloat. (Y is like Smith.) Person Z cannot be categorized with X or with Y.

Z  always  does  what  he  values,  which  is  composing  music.  And  what  he

values is what he wants. He wants what he wants to want. Because he’s

doing what he wants, he has the freedom that X has that Y lacks. Becausehe’s doing what he wants to want, he has the kind of freedom that Y has

that X lacks. And since, of the three, he’s the only one who has both kinds of

freedom, he’s obviously the most free of them all.



      Thus, one is free insofar as two conditions are met: (i) one acts on

one’s second-order desires, as opposed to one’s first-order desires; and (ii)

one’s second-order desires are in alignment with one’s first-order desires.



      To see the merits, and also the shortcomings, of Frankfurt’s brilliant

analysis,  we  must  take  a  moment  to  say  how  that  analysis  relates  to

compatibilism.



      5.2 Freedom as self-determination



        We’ve considered two analyses of freedom:



      (i) x performed act A freely” = “it is because x chose to do A that he did

it,"



      and



      (ii) "x performed A freely’’ = “A reflects who x really is."



      These two views can be combined into the view that



      (iii) “x performed act A freely” = “it is because x chose to A that he did

it, provided that this choice of x’s reflects who x really is.”          This analysis, which is basically Frankfurt’s, embodies a profound

insight into the nature of human freedom. We’ll see later that, although it’s a

step in the right direction, it isn’t correct: for it is possible to warp one’s higher-

order desires to suit one’s first-order desires and, thus, to make one’s higher-

order desires be mere vehicles for first-order desires.



 But right now, I’d like to concentrate on an apparent problem with

Frankfurt’s analysis that, although, I suspect,  some would be inclined to think

otherwise, isn’t an actual problem with it:



                      [14]
                  (FD) Smith  has  given  himself  over  to  drug

        addiction. He spends days doing drugs. (He has unlimited

        supplies  of  money  and  never  has  trouble  getting  them.)

        Smith  has  many  talents—he’s  a  great  water-skier,  a  great

          short-story writer, etc., but, because of his addiction, these

        gifts of his lie fallow.



                  Green, on the other hand, hasn’t given himself over

        to addiction. He spends his days doing things that augment

        who he is. Green can’t indulge every craving that he has.

        Unlike Smith, he doesn’t have the money to do so.



                  You  (JMK/Frankfurt)  would  say  that  Green  is  freer

        than Smith, and your reason would be that, even though he

        can’t gratify as many desires as Smith can, the desires that

        Green does gratify have the right roots, whereas those that

        Smith gratifies do not.



                I grant that Smith’s condition is worse than Green’s,

        and also that Smith is less free than Green. But, contrary to

        what  you  say,  that i s because,  when  it  comes  to  desire

          gratification, Green’s batting average is better than Smith’s.        There  are  a  lot  of  aspirations  that  Smith  has  that  will  be

          thwarted  as  long  as  he’s  imprisoned  by  addiction.  Smith

        wants to do cocaine more than he wants to be a writer, but it

        doesn’t  follow  that  he no  longer wants to be a writer. He

                                        [15] 
        could very well want both.Let’s suppose he does. In that

        case, a very strong desire of his is being frustrated. It’s true

        that he’s the one who’s frustrating it, but that doesn’t mean it

        isn’t frustrated.



                  Smith will inevitably have many other desires that his

          cocaine addiction dooms to frustration. In his pre-addiction

        days, we may suppose, Smith enjoyed many things that he no

        longer enjoys. We can assume that he desired to do each of

        these things, and we can also assume that he still desires

        them,  even  though  he  obviously  doesn’t  desire  them  as

        strongly as he desires cocaine. Many desires are rooted in

          personality  structures.  A  desire  to  play  the  piano  or  read

          Nietzsche doesn’t just overtake one; it’s rooted in enduring

          structural facts about one’s personality. And as long as the

          personality structure is there, one’s inability to express it in

        the  form  of  action  is,  practically  by  definition,  a  form  of

          frustration.  Smith’s  personality  structure  may  still  support

        those desires. (And almost certainly will. Addiction doesn’t

        turn people into complete vegetables, at least not right away,

        and usually not ever.) It could be that Smith thinks it would

        be greater. But it’s not so clear that it would in fact be greater.

        The phenomenological expression of that frustration would

        be more intense. But that doesn’t necessarily mean that the

        desire in question is itself more intense. Desires, even short-

        lived  ones,  are  structures;  they  aren’t feelings. And  the

        feelings to which a desire gives rise don’t necessarily make it

        clear how intense that desire really is.



          FD is close to the truth, but it falls just short. Another story showswhy. Aaronson is a coward who has no self-confidence. So even though he

wants to write novels and is extremely talented at it, he doesn’t do so. It isn’t

safe enough. It’s too bohemian for his stodgy, blinkered parents and for his

equally  stodgy  friends  (who  he  doesn’t  even  like—he  just  pretends  to  like

them,  since  he’s  supposed  to).  To  make  a  living,  Aaronson  sells  insurance,

which he hates. His life is a waking death.



      In living as others want him to, Smith is surrendering his freedom  and

he is also dooming many desires of his to frustration. But those two failings,

though related, are not identical. Aaronson is suppressing an important side of

himself. The personality structures that he is suppressing give rise to many

ardent desires, but they aren’t identical with such desires. His losing his

freedom consists in his suppressing these structures. The desire frustration

that follows is an effect of this loss of freedom and isn’t identical with it.



      So Aaronson’s loss of freedom isn’t identical with his being unable to

do what he wants; his being unable to do what he wants is a by-product of

his loss of freedom. To be sure, his inability to do what he wants is itself a

loss of freedom. But, important though this second kind of freedom is, it’s

distinct  from  the  first  kind  and  a  derivative  of  it.  So  being  free  consists

primarily in being oneself, and secondarily in being able to do what one

wants. And this is obviously close to what Frankfurt is saying, if it doesn’t

coincide with it.



      5.3. Frankfurt's analysis systemically flawed  




  Many  analyses  that  philosophers  put  forth  seem  not  to  embody

genuine  attempts  to  find  the  truth.  Frankfurt's  analysis  of  freedom does

embody such an attempt. And that attempt is almost successful.



            But it falls short, as we'll later see. To outline what we'll find:Acts that are driven by one's Higher-order desires need not be free; for

people can, and often do, warp their higher-order desires, so as to make

them fit their first-order desires. Higher-order desires, in other words, can

become vehicles for first-order desires. A lazy, weak person can warp his

higher-order desires so that they merely rubber-stamp the craven first-order

desires of which his actions are compulsive expressions.



      We will find that truly free acts are those that are driven, not by

higher-order desires, but by values. We will find that there is no agency of

any kind where there are no selves, and we will find that, where there are

no values, there are no selves, though there may be minds. I will leave it at

that for now, since the entirety of the last several sections of this book will

be spent decrypting these remarks, and I'll wrap up this leg of the discussion

with some points about psychopathology that bear out what we'll say in

Sections 7.0-12.0 and will also make it clear to what a large extent what

we're going to say is derivative of what Frankfurt already has said. 



      6.0   Ego-dystonic vs. ego-syntonic causes




  To be free, we have argued, one must identify with one’s desires—

gratifying them isn’t enough. Psychologists refer to mental contents that one

identifies with as ego-syntonic and to those that one doesn’t identify with as

ego-dystonic. An understanding of this distinction may clarify why determinism

is necessary for freedom and why indeterminism threatens it.



        Some people who suffer from psychological disturbances identify with

their symptoms. They don’t see their symptoms as symptoms. For example, the

acute schizophrenic who sees goblins dancing on his bed thinks that he’s seeing

things as they are. To his mind, it’s other people who are wrong: they can’t see

what’s there; he can. The same holds of the paranoiac who thinks her phone

conversations are being monitored by the President.      These  are  ego-syntonic  disorders.  The  viewpoint  embodied  in  the

patient’s symptoms coincides with the viewpoint of the patient himself. The

latter doesn’t regard the former as an “alien intruder.”



      But not all psychological disturbances are like this. The classic example

                                              [16] 
is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).Those afflicted with this disorder

obsess over matters hardly worthy of their attention; they’re compelled to

perform absurd acts (e.g., they’re compelled to snap their fingers if they have a

thought about the number seven); they’re also compelled to perform normal

acts an abnormal number of times or for an abnormally long period (e.g.,

they’re compelled to brush their teeth 20 times a day or to shower for hours on

end). But sufferers of OCD know that their obsessions and compulsions are

irrational. They succumb to the compulsions not because they believe there to

be any objective reason to do so, but because, for reasons unknown to them,

they  suffer  intolerable  anxiety  if  they  don’t.  And  they  know  that  their

obsessions  are  not  legitimate;  they  know  that  those  obsessions  aren’t

comparable  to  Einstein’s  obsession  with  identifying  framework-invariant

physical  laws  or  Beethoven’s  obsessive  dedication  to  perfecting  the

Hammerklavier Sonata. They obsess despite themselves. They don’t think their

obsessions have any legitimate basis. They just can’t stop them.



      Thus,  those  afflicted  with  OCD  don’t  identify  with  their  symptoms.

Unlike schizophrenics, they see their symptoms as symptoms. Their symptoms

belong to their minds but not to them; they are like alien-invaders that have

taken root in their psyches.



        Bearing these points in mind, consider the following scenario. You hate

numbers. You are not detail-oriented. You want to spend all day writing novels.

(You’re a very talented novelist.) You know all of this. But one day you are

overcome with an intense desire to become an accountant. This desire came

out of nowhere. It has no roots in your personality.        You obviously don’t identify with this desire. This is because it has no

roots  in  who  you  are.  And  the  reason  it  has  no  such  roots  is  that  your

existing values, desires, aspirations, and so on, had no hand in giving rise to

it.



        Were you to act on this desire, there is a sense in which you’d be

acting freely, but there’s a deeper sense in which you’d be acting unfreely.

You’d be acting (un)freely in a sense similar to (though not quite coincident

with, as we’ll see) the sense in which somebody who hands his money over

to a gunman is acting (un)freely.



        Suppose that, while pointing a gun at Smith, Green says “your money

or your life.” In handing over his money, Smith is acting freely in the sense

that he’s doing what it is that, the circumstances being what they are, he

wants to do; and he’s acting unfreely in the sense that, the circumstances

being what they are, what he wants to do is not what he wants to want to

do.



        Much like Smith, you’re damned if you do and damned if you don’t.

Supposing that you knuckle under to your ego-dystonic desire to become an

accountant, you are acting freely in the sense that you are doing what you

want to do, and you are acting unfreely in the sense that you are not doing

what you want to want to do.



        That said, there is a sense in which you are less free than Smith. The

circumstances being what they are, Smith must exercise his agency in ways

that he’d rather not have to exercise it. But this agency is quite intact.



      But your agency is not intact. Your ego-dystonic desire to become an

accountant is competing for control over the very mechanisms that convert

ego-syntonic intentions of yours into action; and were you to give into this

desire,  you  would  to  that  extent  be  forfeiting  control  over  thosemechanisms. By virtue of having that desire, you’re in a position similar to

that of the President of a country much of which is controlled by war-lords

who don’t recognize his authority—warlords who, though they operate in

his country, are not of it, and whose sphere of authority is only as big as the

President’s sphere of influence is small.



        Smith’s situation is like that of a President whose country is being

attacked by a foreign nation but who has complete control over his own

country. Even though Smith is in a situation in which he is forced to act in

ways  in  which  he  wouldn’t  otherwise  act,  his  autonomy  is  not  on  that

account compromised; and there is thus an important sense in which Smith

is freer than you are.



      6.1 A point concerning mental illness




        Earlier,  I  referenced  Beethoven  and  Einstein.  Interestingly,  both

 
suffered from OCD.So do many other high achievers. What this shows is not

that OCD per se conduces to high performance, but that the personality

traits that, when pathologized, are expressed as OCD lend themselves to

high  achievement.  Beethoven,  Einstein,  and  other  OCD-afflicted  high

achievers  were  capable  of  intense  concentration,  were  highly  self-critical

and, in order to satisfy the draconian standards of perfection they imposed

upon themselves, were punctilious in their prosecution of the projects they

undertook. Someone with these performance-enhancing character traits is

more likely than others to respond to anxiety and disturbances generally by

becoming  obsessive  and  compulsive.  But mere obsessiveness  and

compulsiveness are not pathological.



        Also, there isn’t a well-defined line between pathological and non-

pathological  obsessive  compulsiveness;  and  one’s  pathologies  may  be

implicated in, and in some cases even enhance, one’s efforts. So given thatBeethoven had OCD, it’s unlikely that it was to no degree involved in his

composing  the  Hammerklavier  Sonata,  even  though  his  composing  that

work was, on balance, non-pathological.



      This  exposes  one  of  the  main  differences  between  physical  and

mental illness. Physical illnesses are to no degree adaptive (except in some

purely  accidental  manner—one’s  having  asthma  might  prevent  one  from

                                                                      [17]
joining the army and then being injured on the battlefield). But mental

illnesses,  specifically  ego-dystonic  ones,  are  sometimes  adaptive.  This  is

because ego-dystonic illnesses are what result when defensive mechanisms

become  too  strong.  Excessive  insecurity,  fearfulness,  and  anxiety  are

defense mechanisms that have gone too far and that, consequently, inhibit

the patient in some respects. But those same overdeveloped mechanisms

may enhance the patient in other respects. An OCD mathematician’s ability

to focus on a minute task for hours on end is conducive to real achievement.

In that respect, it’s non-pathological. And there’s no real chance that the

psychological mechanisms that make it possible for the mathematician to

sustain such a high level of concentration for such a long time have a purely

pathological  basis.  But  it’s  a  distinct  possibility  that,  depending  on  the

mathematician, the mechanisms that make that possible are considerably

reinforced by mechanisms the very purpose of which, at least when they

were first developed, was to narrow the individual’s psyche, so as to cast

intolerable conceits into the abyss of the unconscious.



      It should be pointed out that mechanisms whose original purpose is

neurotic  can  end  up  becoming  non-neurotic  virtues  of  character.  For

example, to deal with some specific problem (e.g., a sense of helplessness

that is induced by an unstable home-life), a given person might over-develop

some existing character trait (e.g., a tendency to focus on details becomes a

maniacal obsession with them), which, after the initial disturbance has been

dealt with, assumes some non-pathological, adaptive form (e.g., a talent for

neurosurgery).        Basically, there isn’t always a clear distinction between mental illness

and mental hyper-wellness. And the fact that the border is blurry isn’t to be

understood in terms of the trivial, ubiquitous fact that most borders are

blurry (that, for example, there is no sharp line between short and tall, poor

and rich, etc.). The blurring of the line, where mental illness is concerned,

has  to  do  with  the  fact  that  such  illness  is,  in  some  ways,  at  certain

junctures, constitutive of certain kinds of mental health (or, what may be

different, mental flourishing).



        This, I think, is why “genius” and “madness” are proverbially thought

to go together. I don’t think that the two, in fact, go together. Madness is

always performance-inhibiting, for reasons that we’ll soon discuss. But the

eccentricities associated with ego-dystonic ailments are often conflated with

madness, leading to the false view that insanity is associated in some way

with genius. I must emphasize that ego-dystonic ailments are not a form of

madness. (Not all psychological disturbances are forms of madness.) So far

as the word “madness” has a clear meaning, it refers to a condition in which

one identifies with one’s pathologies—it refers to ego-syntonic ailments. A

precondition  for  such  conditions  is  a  lowering  of  inhibitions  that  are

operative in psychologically healthy people and that, when hyper-operative,

constitute OCD and other ego-dystonic ailments. Goblins and ghouls are no

part of a sane person’s life except when, during sleep, there is a lowering of

the  inhibitions  that,  during  wakefulness,  rightly  keep  these  creatures  of

childhood in the cellar of the unconscious. A person with OCD (who isn’t also

a person with an ego-syntonic disorder) is like the sane person, except that

the OCD person’s defenses are in overdrive. So, in such a person, it isn’t just

ghouls and goblins that get the ax: healthy beliefs and sentiments do as well.

One’s antipathy towards one’s father, and one’s suspicions concerning one’s

best friend, become off-limits in the way that, in a less neurotic person, only

goblins and dragons are.



      In terms of its outward effects, this hyper-inhibitedness can mimic

“madness”---which,  so  far  as  it  means  anything,  refers  to  psychosis.  The

psychotic person refuses to touch the doorknob because he thinks that it'sSatan’s horn. The obsessive-compulsive person refuses to touch it because,

in his mind, it is connected, by way of emotionally charged associations that

he  knows  to  have  no  objective  basis, with  emotions  that  he  does  not

countenance (e.g., urges that, at some level, one believes to be are wrong,

such as incestuous or sadistic urges towards a loved one). But the outward

observer only sees some eccentric who refuses to touch a doorknob. Hence

the conflation of psychosis with ego-dystonic illness; and—since the latter is

associated  with  (though  it’s  not  the  most  productive  manifestation  of)

character  traits  that  are  associated  with  high  achievement—hence  the

bogus stereotype of the “mad genius.”



        Ego-syntonic  illnesses,  unlike  ego-dystonic  ones,  are  not  at  all

adaptive,  the  reason  being  that  they  result  from  a weakening of  one’s

defenses  to  a  profound,  highly  incapacitating  disorganization  of  one’s

psyche. So, in a way, those suffering from ego-dystonic illnesses are even

further removed from those suffering from ego-syntonic illnesses than those

who suffer from neither. In this connection, it is worth pointing out ego-

dystonic  maladies  seem  to  coincide  with  what  are  sometimes  called

“neuroses” and that ego-syntonic ones coincide with “psychoses.”



      7.0 An as of yet unidentified problem with Frankfurt's analysis




        According to Frankfurt, a free act is one that is driven by higher-order

desires. This is false. A free act is one that is driven by one’s values. Values are

not desires. (Values may lead to desires, and desires may lead to values. But

values aren’t desires.)  A story will help us begin to establish these claims.



        You hate opera, and you hate the kind of people who hate opera. But

those people are chic; they’re the “right” sort of people. You want to be one of

them; you want to be chic. But it isn’t because you see their lives as being

valuable that you want to be one of them. In fact, you see them as empty, bad

people who act in empty, bad ways. But you’re a follower, not a leader. Yourdesire to enjoy listening to opera has nothing to do with your valuing opera or,

indeed, with your valuing anything. That second-order desire of yours is simply

a means to end, the end being the fulfillment of some first-order desire, the

nature of which we will discuss in a moment. You know that, if you don’t come

to have a genuine love of opera, you’ll inadvertently disclose to the people

whose ranks you are trying to join that you don’t much care for them. While in

your box-seat at the opera-house, you’ll look bored and sullen; you’ll sound

fake when you tell these big people how much you like opera. And you believe

that, as a result, they won’t let you join them, in consequence of which you’ll

wither away.



  That first-order desire is not a desire to survive: you know that your

survival doesn't depend on your being in the good graces of these people.

Rather, it is a cowardly desire to fit in. And that first-order desire is, we may

plausibly  suppose,  the  off-spring  of  another,  equally  despicable  first-order

desire, namely, your desire to avoid the hard, anxiety-ridden work of forging

your own identity. So it is laziness and cowardice that underlie your first-order

desire to fit in. It is not, I repeat, a desire to survive.



        In this context, your behavior is a compulsive response to fear and

laziness. It is not a free act. It is a compulsive, pseudo-free act.



   In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  fear-driven

behavior and cowardly behavior. People are vulnerable. They must take their

vulnerabilities into account when deciding what to do. The coward has no

compunctions about parting with who he is in his efforts to survive. The fearful,

non-coward will avoid parting with his identity until, having considered all of

the possibilities, even those that would involve the hard work and alienation

from  ways  of  living  to  which  he  is  accustomed,  he  judges  that  he  has  no

alternative but to forfeit at least part of his identity in order to survive. It should

be said that many a fearful, non-coward will risk death before forfeiting his

identity or even a part thereof.      7.1 Second order desires sometimes are the puppets of first order

desires




      So,  in  this  context,  your  higher-order-driven  desire  is  purely

instrumental:  It  is  just  a  means  by  which  you  try  to  gratify  your  desire  to

survive.  And,  though  you want to  survive,  you  don’t value it;  or,  what  is

probably  more  accurate,  your  desire  to  survive  is  more  basic  than  your

judgment  that  it  would  be  good  to  survive,  and  the  latter  is  an

intellectualization, a derivative, of the former. Your desire to survive is a force

unto itself. It doesn’t await your approval. It directly motivates action. And,

should you come to approve of it, this judgment of yours has little role, if any, in

the instigation of actions on your part that, so you hope, conduce to your

survival. Your desire to survive is much more primitive than any judgment of

yours as to the extent to which some norm is being complied with. All animals

want to survive; but not all animals make judgments. Even though there may

well be cases where your desire for such and such is a consequence of your

judgment that such and such has value, your desire to survive isn’t one of these

cases. Thus, second-order desires can be value-free; for they can be nothing

more than the techniques for gratifying (valuatively empty) first-order desires.



          7.2  Fake freedom: The warping of one’s higher-order desires to

make them validate one’s lower-order desires  




 What if one warps one’s higher order desires to validate one’s lower

order desires? What if one rationalizes? When lecturing on Frankfurt’s analysis

of freedom, a student of mine, Jared Murphy, asked these questions. Until that

time, I had accepted Frankfurt’s analysis. But Mr. Murphy’s question made me

rethink it and then reject and replace it.



   These questions show that, as it stands, Frankfurt’s analysis, won't do.

Knowing  that  doing  right  by  one’s  existing  second-order  desires  would  bedifficult, and knowing that doing right by one’s first-order desires would be easy

and  pleasurable,  one  can  convince  oneself  that  one’s  current  second-order

desires are the wrong ones and that they ought to be replaced with ones that,

as it happens, validate one’s current first-order desires. If one is too lazy and

weak to do what one believes to be the right thing, one has a choice: (i) one

can choose to do the right thing, which, as one knows, involves making much

needed, but labor-intensive, changes to one’s own character; or, (ii) one can

choose to replace one’s existing second order desires with ones that---what a

surprise!---just happen to validate one’s existing first-order desires.



          Doing this involves convincing oneself that one’s character-defects

are actually virtues. So, supposing that Green is somebody who is doing just

this,  here  is  what  he  might  tell  himself  (“GR”  is  short  for  “Green’s

rationalization”):



                    (GR) I’m not “lazy.” Unlike the blinkered maniac

          who works all the time and never takes the time to smell a

          rose or go to the beach, I see the larger picture. Nor am I

          “weak.” Unlike the so-called “hero” who moronically tries

          to buck the system, I see the larger picture; I see that

          despite that system’s imperfections, it is one that I am

          duty-bound to comply with; and, unlike the so-called hero,

          I am enough of a realist to know that complying with the

          system involves getting one’s hands dirty. The “hero” isn’t

          a hero at all. 



                        To be sure, the (so-called) hero’s efforts have

          a sheen of valor. And, in sticking up for the little guy---the

          one  whose  work  is  being  plagiarized  by  the  well-

            entrenched senior professor, the one who is being framed

          by  the  oft-decorated  police-officer---the  hero’s  conduct

          might initially appear to be more in keeping with the rules

          that  are  constitutive  of  the  system.  But  that  initial

          appearance is an illusion.     We need the system. If we don’t follow the

          rules, the system will collapse. But there are two kinds of

            system-constitutive rules: those that are spoken and those

          that are not. The hero’s behavior is heroic only relative to

          the first set of rules. But, in this context—the one in which

          it would be a short-sighted person would say that I am

          being “weak,” the one in which I’m supporting the senior

          professor’s  portrayal  of  events---it  is  the  second  set  of

          rules that count. The hero (the odd graduate student or

            pre-tenure professor who is “telling it like it is” and isn’t

          abetting the efforts of the senior professor) is violating

          those rules. And he’s doing so knowing that, because the

          rules he is violating must never be spoken, people will be

          forced to characterize his anti-social, system-undermining

          behavior as system-compliant. So the hero’s behavior is

          particularly  insidious.  Therefore,  to  the  extent  that  his

          behavior  is  antithetical  to  mine,  I  will  take  it  as  a

          complement when somebody reacts my system-friendly

          conduct by calling me “a weak, faceless bureaucrat” or “an

          empty, servile, cringing shell.” 



                        To be sure, the system isn’t perfect. It often

          rewards the wicked and punishes the virtuous. It often

          requires that one speak ill of somebody who one knows is

            decent---who, though nobody says it, everybody (except

          for  a  few  imbeciles)  knows  is  decent  and  who,  though

          nobody says it, everyone (same qualification) knows to be

          a person of merit---and to laud somebody who one knows

          (and who everyone knows, etc.) to have no merit.



      But, on balance, the system is good, and to

          keep it going, one must follow the rules---all of them, not

          just  the  spoken  ones.  And  if  that  means  taking  the

          “coward’s path," so be it.      Deep down, Green doesn’t really believe GR. Deep down, he knows

that he’s a servile, weak person who is doing the pragmatic thing, as opposed

to the right thing. But, at least to the extent that he’s convinced by GR, Green

has replaced one set of higher-order desires (e.g., a desire to act virtuously,

even  when,  because  of  circumstances,  one  wishes  to  act  in  a  craven  and

iniquitous manner) with a different second-order desire (a desire to resist the

odd temptation one occasionally feels to do the “right” thing, even when it is

not to one’s practical advantage to do so).



  It’s pretty clear that this world is replete with people like Green. This is

a problem for Frankfurt’s analysis. So far as Green is acting on his new higher-

order desires---the ones that, in telling himself GR, he is installing---Green is

letting his own cowardice make his decisions for him and he is thus not acting

freely. A junky who lets his low cravings make his choices for him; he is acting

freely only when he takes the reins and acts in accordance with what he wants

to do, as opposed to what his addiction wants him to do. Green is similarly

unfree,  since,  instead  of  doing  what h e wants  to  do,  he  does  what  his

cowardice wants him to do.



 So, contrary to what Frankfurt says, an act can be unfree even if it

expresses a higher-order desire. This happens when the higher-order desire is

the puppet of a lower-order desire. 



      8.0  Values ≠ desires



        Given the points just made, Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom must be

modified or augmented in some way. More specifically, Frankfurt must take

one the following four positions (and make any such adjustments to his system

as the position chosen requires). The result will, I believe, be a decent analysis

of at least one, very important kind of freedom. Here are those positions:                  (i)  Contrary  to  what  was  just  said,  people don’t

          rationalize; they don’t deceive themselves.



                  (ii)  Although  people  do  rationalize  and  deceive

          themselves,  their  doing  so  doesn’t  involve  their actually

          replacing any higher-order values of theirs with other higher-

        order values. It involves only their falsely believing that they

        have done so. The original values stay on, this being why

          rationalizers are tormented by gnawing feelings of guilt (from

        which  they  typically  attempt  to  insulate  themselves  by

        adding  more  rationalizations  to  their  existing

          rationalizations). In other words, rationalization isn’t about

        actually replacing one’s values/higher-order desires with new

        ones. It is about making oneself believe that one has effected

        such a  replacement.



 So, in deferring to the senior professor, Green isn’t

        acting  according  to  his  second  order  desires.  Rather,  he’s

        acting according to what he’s deluded himself into believing

        are  his  second  order  desires.  (Consequently,  the  fact  that

        Green’s actions are not free, except in the sense that they’re

          voluntary, is consistent with Frankfurt’s analysis.)



                  (iii) Situations such as those described by GR neither

          constitute  cases  where  one  set  of  higher-order  values  is

          replaced with another nor constitute cases where some new

        set of higher-order values has altogether failed to have been

        installed.  Rather,  such  situations  involve  a  bifurcation  or

          fracturing of the psyche---a kind of splitting of oneself into

        two selves, one of which still has the old set of values and the

        other of which has the new set of values.     So, according to this hypothesis, rationalizations do

        install new higher-order desires. Contrary to (iii), however,

        they do so, not by ousting old higher-order desires, but by

        adding new ones to them.



   Given that the new ones are inconsistent with the

        old ones, rationalization necessarily involves a degradation of

        one’s  psychological  integrity.  One’s  thinking  must  become

        more illogical than it used to be or one’s agency---by which I

        mean the totality of faculties involved in one’s being able to

        decide what to do---must undergo a sort of splitting.  



 (iv) Although second-order values can be uninstalled

        and  replaced  with  others,  a  distinction  must  be  made

        between  higher-order  values,  on  the  one  hand,  and core

        values, on the other. All core values are higher-order values,

        but  not  all  higher-order  values  are  core  values.  Green’s

        actions are unfree because, although they’re consistent with

        (some of) his higher-order values, they aren’t consistent with

        his core values.     



      8.1 Free acts as value-driven acts



            (i) is out of the question. To say that people don’t rationalize is itself

to rationalize, given what an obvious empirical fact it is that people rationalize.



     Also, the essence of Frankfurt’s position is that, if one is to be free,

one must not be at war with oneself: intrapsychic conflict is the enemy of

freedom.  Frankfurt  is  aware  that  there  are  different  ways  of  eliminating

intrapsychic conflict and that some of them not only fail to bring one freedom

but strip one of it. For example, given somebody who is torn between shootingheroin  and  kicking  his  addiction,  that  person  can  cease  to  be  at  war  with

himself by relinquishing his desire to kick his addiction and, thus, to surrender

to it. But, as Frankfurt himself clearly states, by resolving his internal conflict in

that way, the junky is forfeiting his freedom. Nonetheless, Frankfurt holds that,

in cases where internal conflict is so intense that no one party has uncontested

control over the reigns of agency, one cannot possibly become free without

ceasing  to  be  internally  conflicted.  Knowing  that  some  ways  of  resolving

internal conflicts fail to make one free, Frankfurt holds that the way in which a

person resolves a case of internal conflict will bring that person freedom if and

only if two conditions are met, to wit:



                  (a)  The  resolution  of  the  conflict  involves  his

          higher-order desires prevailing over one’s lower desires;



                  (b)  The  way  in  which  that  person’s  higher-order

          desires prevail over his lower-order desires doesn’t involve

          the  latter  being  unduly  frustrated  and,  consequently,

          requires that the victorious higher-order desires so align

          with  the  lower-order  desires  over  which  they’ve

          triumphed that the latter can discharge themselves in a

          way that doesn’t threaten the hegemony of their higher-

          order masters. 



  This position is a near duplicate of a position that Freud explicitly

                                                            [18]
advocated, in various forms, throughout his career. It may be possible in

some  attenuated,  strictly  logical  sense  for  there  to  be  intrapsychic  conflict

without self-deception or rationalization. But, human psychology being what it

is,  it  seems  that  self-deception  is  essential  to  the  perpetuation,  if  not  the

initiation,  of  such  conflict.  In  any  case,  (i)  is prima  facie discrepant  with

empirical facts; and, although many philosophers and psychologists virulently

deny (i), they do so on a priori grounds that, as we’ll see, are made of straw or,

what is much more common, they don’t bother to defend their position.    (ii) is inconsistent with empirical facts. People’s values do change. As

a 20 year old, Jim wants to save the world. He works for the Peace Corps. He

spends his weekends working at soup kitchens. As a 40 year old, Jim is an

investment banker who lives to accumulate wealth and wouldn’t dream of not

having a live-in maid, butler, etc. One could say that, even as a 20 year old, Jim’s

values were really those of a greedy banker or that, as a 40 year old, his values

are really those of a hippie do-gooder. But such a position would be ad hoc and

counter-empirical.



   To be sure, there are many cases where somebody who is in fact a

greedy sociopath works at a soup-kitchen (etc.), so as to bolster his resume in

the hopes of making a lot of money on Wall St. And there are people who make

a lot of money on Wall St. who wish that they were doing good for the world

and whose consequent grief all the gin in the world cannot drown out. But

there are also people whose values truly change. 



  (iii) describes something that does in fact happen. But it does not

describe what is typically happening in cases of rationalization. In my personal

experience, and in the clinical experience of many an authority, what typically

happens is that some one set of higher-order desires becomes corrupt: there is

a  mixing  of  the  old  (pure)  higher-order  desires  with  new  (corrupt,

rationalization-driven) higher-order desires. There is still just one agent. There

aren’t two agents—a Dr. Jekyll and a Mr. Hyde—inhabiting one body. There is

but one agent. Some of his higher-order desires are wholesome and some of

them are unwholesome; and in some cases a single higher-order desire may be

wholesome in some respects and unwholesome in others.



  (iv) is the only remaining option. In the pages to come, we'll find much

reason  to  accept  (iv)  and  no  reason  to  reject  it.  Incidentally,  this  analysis,

though clearly similar to Frankfurt’s analysis, does differ from it in a non-trivial

way.  Frankfurt  seems  to  hold  that  one’s  higher-order  desires ipso  facto are

one’s core desires. But that is precisely what the present hypothesis denies.      8.2 Some general facts relating to the nature of values




 In the next section, we’ll answer the question: “what are values?” 

Having answered this question, we’ll be able to answer the question: “what is it

for an act to be free?” We’ll answer the latter question in the next section.



                  (1)  Values must be distinguished from things that

        have value.  A great novel has value, but it is not itself a value.



                  (2) "Value" is a relational term. What has value for

        Smith may not have value for Jones.



                  (3)   (2) doesn’t entail that no value is better than any

        other value; nor does it entail that values are in any way

        ‘subjective’  or  ‘unreal.’  The  term  ‘three  miles  from’  is

          relational; but whether Smith is three miles away from Jones

        has nothing to do with anyone’s feelings or opinions about

        anything. The same thing is true of values, as we’ll see. Given

        that values are judgments, values can be correct or incorrect.



         Given that values are relational judgments, two

        people  who  have  different  values  needn’t  disagree  about

        anything. I value playing the piano and I don’t value playing

        scrabble. That means that, in my judgment, I bear a certain

          relation to the first activity that I don’t bear to the second.

        Smith, let us suppose, values playing scrabble more than he

        values playing the piano; this means that, in his judgment, he

        bears a certain relation to the one activity that he does not

        bear  to  the  other.  Those  two  judgments  are  perfectly

          compatible.  So  even  though  my  values  are  antithetical  to

        Smith’s, there is nothing that we disagree about.                     (4) Liking something is not the same thing as valuing

        it. People value activities (e.g., helping somebody in need)

        that they don’t enjoy and enjoy activities (e.g., doing cocaine)

        that they don’t value.



      One tends to enjoy the activities that one values. I

        value playing the piano, and I also enjoy it; and these facts

        are obviously closely linked. But the relation I bear to that

        activity by virtue of enjoying it is distinct from the relation

        that I bear to it by virtue of valuing it. By virtue of the fact

        that I value playing the piano, I bear a cognitive relation to

        that  activity;  in  other  words,  my  valuing  it  consists  in  my

        having made a judgment about it (viz., I see it as having value

        and therefore---for reasons that we’ll soon identify---as being

        agential). By virtue of the fact that I enjoy playing the piano, I

        bear  a  purely affective relation to it (viz., it makes me feel

        good).   



      8.3 What are values?




      A value is a judgment on the part of some person (or sentient creature)

to the effect that a certain course of action, or a certain outlook, will increase

the scope of its agency. A moment ago I was reading a book (The Scientific

Image, by Bas Van Fraassen). I then had a sudden urge to read a different book

(The Will to Power, by Nietzsche).  I was driven by a whim. Van Fraassen’s book

was illuminating; I was not wasting my time by reading it. And, although, for

personal and professional reasons, I do at some point have to read Nietzsche’s

book (which, judging from the fragments I’ve read, is extremely good), I would,

in giving in to my whim to ditch Van Fraassen, be undermining a resolution of

mine, and doing so for no good reason.



     The result of my ditching Van Fraassen under these circumstanceswould have been a degradation of psychological integrity. I would have been

allowing my decision-making process to give undue weight to sudden fancies. I

would have been sending a message to myself that it’s ok not to carry out an

intention that I had formed in a rational and informed manner and that I knew

that, if successfully carried out, would make me a better and more powerful

person. This illustrates, and also supports, though only to a small degree, our

contention that value is a judgment to the effect that a certain course of action

or way of living increases the scope and power of one’s agency.



         I value carrying out rationally formed intentions. But why?

Because I would be diminishing myself if I indulged every passing whim. So far

as the fickle winds of fancy determined by life-path, I would not be calling the

shots; I would not be the captain of the U.S.S. JM Kuczynski. So far as impulses,

rather than rationally formed intentions, determined my conduct, I would not

be an agent.



       Even though I may have desired to read The Will to Power more

than I desired to read The Scientific Image, I valued reading the latter at that

particular juncture more than I valued reading the former. My reason: under

the  circumstances,  my  reading The  Will  to  Power would have constituted a

surrender of agency to sub-agential whims.



      8.3.1 Interlude: An objection to the point just made




 There seem to be counterexamples to this contention. For there seem

to  be  cases  where,  driven  by  his  values,  somebody  martyrs  himself  or

otherwise  diminishes  himself.  There  are  cases  where  a  person  correctly

characterizes an act as  “valuable” even though that same act, if carried out,

would diminish his agency and possibly destroy it. But that isn’t because our

thesis is false. It’s because the word “value” is ambiguous. Sometimes it means

“belief  that  a  given  way  of  acting  (or  being)  enhances one’s  own agency.”

Sometimes it means “belief that a given way of acting (or being) enhancesagency in general---not necessarily one’s own, but net amount of agency had

by people overall.” This second usage of the term “value” is derivative of the

first, even though one’s initial impression would probably be that it’s the other

way around.     



      Most ethical systems use the word “value” (or its analogues) in

the just-mentioned derivative manner. The one exception to this is ethical

egoism, which was advocated by Nietzsche (and not---at least not to my

limited knowledge----by very many other thinkers of substance). We’ll find

at the end of this book that ethical egoism, though not ultimately a viable

moral system, has some hidden virtues.



      8.3.2 What are values? (revisited)




        There are times when I desire to watch TV more than I desire to read

Non-Standard Analysis by Abraham Robinson. But, in general, I value doing the

latter more than I value doing the former. (Why “in general” as opposed to

“always”?  There  are  times  when  my  reading Non-Standard  Analysis would

represent a compulsive, pseudo-agential act; and on many of those occasions,

my watching TV would be a more “integrated” and rational course of action

than would my reading some onerous treatise. In general, many is the time

when what would ordinarily be characterized as the “lazy” course of action is

the rational, non-lazy one, the reason being that what is in fact an agency-

diminishing impulse cloaks itself as an intention to perform some action that

would ordinarily be seen as agency-promoting, as when one’s intention to cut

one’s break short so as to go for a five mile run (even though one’s bursitis

makes it a  bad idea to do so) or to continue reading some treatise (even

though, owing to one’s fatigue and consequent vulnerability to performance

diminishing influences, one would ultimately be a better treatise-reader (and

treatise–writer) were one, at this particular juncture,  to  take  a  break  from

treatise reading---we’ll revisit this obscure parenthetical point). I value reading

Non-Standard Analysis even though, at that particular juncture, I do not desireto do so, at least as much as I desire to watch TV, because I judge that reading

that book would consolidate my agency and expand its jurisdiction, whereas

watching TV would fail to have such consequences and would indeed lead to a

withering of agency.



     To be sure, once I turn off the TV and start reading Non-Standard

Analysis, I not only experience gratification, but do so on a number of levels.

First of all, I am proud of myself for doing the right thing. Second, and much

more importantly, in reading Non-Standard Analysis, I experience what I will

refer to as agential enjoyment, whereas in lazily watching TV I am experience

non-agential enjoyment. (We tend to use the word “pleasure” to refer to non-

agential enjoyment: one experiences “pleasure” when one enters a warm bath.

But,  although  one enjoys reading  difficult  treatises  or  working  on  one’s

backhand, and although one does experience a kind of pleasure in doing so,

that pleasure is derivative of a certain kind of enjoyment (for lack of a better

word) that comes from exercising one’s agency.)  



      8.3.3 What are values? (further continued)




  I have impulses. Impulses are in me. But they are not of me. I am not

my impulses. There is a sense in which, so far as my behaviors are impulse

driven, I am not acting. To put it another way, so far as I am acting in such

circumstances,  my  actions  are  but  vehicles  for  sub-agential  impulses.

Consequently, my behavior in such circumstances is ultimately only pseudo-

agential. In such cases, that is to say, my agency is involved, but only as a way of

discharging impulses that are sub-agential and, in being acted on, diminish my

agency.



      Here it is important that we make a distinction between two kinds

of impulses: those that one has by virtue of being an agent and those that one

has before one’s mind becomes agential. My impulse to read The Will to Power

is obviously not in the same category as my impulse to eat tubs of ice-cream orto engage in certain carnal acts. The former impulse---though one that, in the

previously  described  circumstances,  ought  to  be  suppressed---is  obviously

derivative  of  the  development  in  me  of  values  and  aptitudes  that  jointly

constitute agency. For that reason, were I, on a whim, to stop reading Van

Fraassen’s book and start reading The Will to Power, I would rightly not judge

myself as harshly as I would if I stopped reading Van Fraassen’s book and

punched my annoying next door neighbor or ate a tub of ice-cream. Giving into

impulses---be those impulses agency-derivative or agency-independent---is a

bad thing. But giving into agency- independent impulses is worse.



      “But by never giving into one’s impulses,” it must be asked, “doesn’t

one become a robot? Doesn’t one become a brittle, neurotic square who can’t

live, love, or laugh?”



        How that question is to be answered depends on what, in this

context, it means to “give in” to an impulse. A healthy person ought indeed to

discharge his base impulses and---what sometimes coincides with so acting---

one ought to act spontaneously. But when one scrutinizes a non-maladaptive

case of “giving into one’s impulses” or of “acting on the fly," one finds that the

decision to do so was a considered one; one finds that the thought-process

behind the decision was to the effect that, since one damages oneself and

deprives oneself of strength by alienating oneself from one’s base impulses---of

which one’s higher values are rarified derivatives---one weakens oneself: one

turns oneself into an emotional cripple, a neurotic nerd, who, having drained

his agency of a source of power, is less agential than one would otherwise be.

So what appear to be cases of acting “on a whim” are cases in which one non-

whimsically (though perhaps almost instantaneously) realizes that it is to the

advantage of one’s agency to act in a way that seems to be whimsical. Genuine

cases  of  whimsical  behavior  are  the  prerogative  of  schizophrenics,  whose

minds are so disorganized that impulses don’t have to go through the usual

vetting process to be converted into action, and of psychopaths, whose vetting

process operates much more intermittently than that of a normal person and is

governed by different operating principles. (Though it may not be apparent,

these points about psychopathy are in the process of being substantiated.)             8.4.0 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s

analysis of moral value




        According to John Stuart Mill, happiness is the one thing that truly has

    [19]
value. So far as anything other than happiness has value, Mill says, it's only

to the extent that it leads to happiness. Right now we'll  examine this thesis of

his,  along  with  his  argument  for  it.  In  so  doing,  we’ll  find  support  for  our

contention that to value x is to judge x to increase the scope or the strength of

one’s agency.



       There’s no denying that writing novels of the same level of merit as

War and Peace is more valuable than doing cocaine. Mill admitted this. Mill

also  admitted  that,  not  having  been  duly  educated  or  endowed  with  the

requisite cognitive faculties, one might fail to know the delights of reading

Hamlet and  would  prefer  drinking  vodka  to  reading  Shakespeare.  But,  Mill

insisted, so far as reading Hamlet is more valuable than drinking vodka, it is

only to the extent that the former brings more happiness than the latter.



       One problem with what Mill says is that happiness presupposes a

value-system. Happiness involves believing oneself to have measured up to

certain benchmarks and thus to embody certain values. (Mice can probably feel

good. But they can't be happy, they can't make judgments of the relevant kind.)

A consequence is that happiness presupposes that there are things other than

happiness that are of value.



            Thus, Mill's contention that happiness is the one and only non-

instrumental good is false. In fact, it's tautologously false, given that happiness

consists in judging oneself to be good in some way or other. What is good for

one person may not be good for another.



          8.4.1 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’sanalysis of moral value (continued)




        Also, Mill claims that, if a person fails to prefer Tolstoy to grain alcohol,

it's because he's defective in some way. But in making that claim, Mill is saying

that Tolstoy is valuable in a way that grain alcohol is not and that one must be

deficient not to see that and, therefore, not to derive more pleasure from

reading good literature than from drinking cheap liquor. So Mill is saying that

there are values other than happiness and that our happiness is a consequence,

and thus not the essence, of our receptiveness to these values.



            Of course, Mill could claim that one can fail to derive any

pleasure at all from Mozart's music, etc. and yet not suffer from any defect. But

in addition to being totally ad hoc---not to mention hypocritical, at least when

put forth by the likes of a cultured person such as Mill, who spent his days

reading “good” literature and listening to “good” music---such a position is

brazenly false. A tone-deaf person who can't distinguish Mozart's music from

the noise made by a dump-truck clearly is deficient in some way: there is

something to which he is blind (or deaf, rather). Setting aside people who are

rightly held in contempt for their musical deficiencies, nobody really believes

that any given person is as good a composer as Mozart or, equivalently, that

Mozart is as bad a composer as any given person. At least some of Mozart’s

works are better than at least some of those of at least some other people. This

is a conservative claim. It’s hard to see how one could sincerely deny it.



     This is not to say that, given any two musical works, one is better

than other. Two musical works may not be comparable. Each may be good in its

own right and it would be artificial to say that one was better than the other.

But there are aesthetic truths. I wrote a fugue once. It wasn’t as good as any of

the fugues that Bach wrote.  The statement “it’s not all a matter of how we feel

about a given work of music: some musical works really have merits that others

lack” doesn’t entail “there is some one relation R such  that  musical  work x

bears R to y iff y is better than x and such that, given any two musical works,

one bears R to the other." (Aesthetic properties are not unusual in this respect.Outside of the narrow horizons within which we operate, the question ‹is x

hotter  than y?› ceases to have a determinate meaning or therefore a single

answer.  But  surely  an  object’s  thermal  properties  are  not  “subjective”  or

“unreal.”)



           Of  course,  these  days,  many claim to reject this sort of non-

relativism, and to hold its advocates in contempt. But that can very easily be

explained without supposing either that it's true or that anyone  believes it. If

it's all just a matter of taste, then—good news!---your sonatas (which even your

mother  describes  as  "execrable”)  are  just  as  good  as  Mozart's.  We’re  all

geniuses! Break out the party hats!



            If there is no aesthetic right or wrong---if a person's view as to the

level of value of a given musical work is a projection of his emotional (and, so it

is  assumed  to  follow,  unfounded)  response  to  it,  instead  of  his  emotional

response to it being a consequence of his belief as to its degree of merit then,

at least in the arena of musical composition, nobody need fear censure. And

given how obviously false that view---or, at least, how thoroughly at variance it

is with people's behavior and sentiments---and given, therefore, how much

self-deception  is  involved  in  making  oneself  believe  it,  that  view  makes  it

possible to accept other positions that absolve one of one's deficits. No longer

is one stupid; one just has a different "but equally valid" opinion.



        Mill could rid his position of its vicious circularity by replacing the

term "happiness" with the term "pleasure," in which case his thesis becomes "a

thing  is  valuable  to  the  extent,  and only to  the  extent,  that  it  promotes

pleasure."  An  immediate  consequence  of  this  view  is  that  the  life  of  a

tapeworm that experiences a large amount of pleasure is more valuable than

that of an Einstein who does not experience quite as much pleasure. Mill is

aware of this problem with his view. He deals with it by saying that listening to

Mozart,  reading  Shakespeare,  etc.  brings  one  more  pleasure  than  does

shooting heroin. But while it can be said that reading Timon of Athens brings

one more happiness than does shooting heroin, it cannot plausibly be said that 
it brings one more pleasure.    



          8.5. An objection to our analysis of what values are




 People sometimes see things that diminish them---that abridge the

scope of their agency and possibly even kill them---as being "valuable." In some

cases, this is simply the result of error. (I value doing push-ups all day because I

                                                                      [20]
foolishly think that, as long as I do so, I'm in control of my life.) But in many

cases no error is involved. Smith rightly sees his self-diminishing activities as a

UNICEF-volunteer as having "value." In fact, practically every system of ethics

                                    [21]
demands a reduction of oneself. 



      This objection is not hard to neutralize. Let VS be a value-system

according to which one's primary ethical obligation is to augment the scope of

other people's agency. One has no moral obligation to promote what has no

moral value. So, one has no moral  obligation  to  promote  welfare  (agency)

unless agency has moral value. A fortiori one's primary moral obligation cannot

be to promote other people's welfare unless agency is the most valuable thing.

But  agency  is,  of  its  very  nature,  something  that  has  only  a relative value:

relative to me, my agency may well be the most valuable thing. (In fact, I have

no doubt that it is.) But relative to you, my agency has no value at all--except in

an  irrelevant,  purely  instrumental  sense.  (All  references  to  "value"  in  this

context are to intrinsic, not instrumental, value.) So VS is saying that, ethically,

what is worthless to a given individual is the very thing that has the most

worth. And I do not see how such a value system could be a coherent one.



            This suggests that one of the following propositions holds:



                  (i) What is of moral value may not be of the slightest

        value to any given individual, in which case anyone who acts        morally is ipso facto acting irrationally. (In fact, even in cases

        where  what  is  moral  happens  to  coincide  with  what  is

        valuable to a given agent, it is not as somebody who is acting

        morally that he is acting rationally. His behavior, if rational,

        merely coincides with that of somebody who is genuinely

        moral. It does not itself embody any morality, being nothing

        more than a mere simulation of it.



                  (ii) What is of moral value is what it is in one's own

        interest to do.



     So a certain incoherence is internal to public value systems. But such

systems must be incoherent in the just-described ways if they are to do their

job. Public value systems exist to ensure that, on balance, people's rights aren't

horribly violated. The only value systems that can accomplish this are ones

that, from a logical viewpoint, are incoherent. (There is nothing incoherent in

the supposition that a value system must be incoherent if it is to have the

causal properties that a public value system ought to have. This is because how

much merit a value-system has is to be judged by the effects on people’s lives

through implementing it, not by its coherence. Value systems are not scientific

doctrines. Thus, a welfare-maximizing viewpoint may be incoherent.) Setting

aside people who are simply deluded (e.g., people who believe that joining cult

X, a precondition for which is wire-transferring their life-savings to the Master’s

Swiss Bank account, is the royal road to self- actualization), when people say

that  performing  self-diminishing  acts  (e.g.,  working  at  a  soup-kitchen)  has

"value,"  they  may  be  speaking  the  truth;  for  what  they  are  saying  is  that

performing such acts, though not intrinsically valuable,  is  valuable in  that it

consolidates value-systems that are instrumental in preserving and augmenting

agency in general.      



      9.0 Minds ≠ Selves In this section I will make some points about the difference between

minds and selves. What I say in this section will be obscure, and I will provide

little  or  no  argumentation  for  it.  The  contents  of  this  section  will  be  both

clarified and justified in the sections following it.



      All selves are minds, but not all minds are selves. A self is a mind

that is an agent. An agent is a mind that acts, and doesn’t just react. In order

for a mind to be capable of acting, instead of just reacting, that mind must do

more than simply facilitate the gratification of primal urges; it must do more

than provide the organism with information concerning the external world that

makes it clear how, without being killed or injured, that organism can eat,

sleep, etc. A mind whose only objectives are to gratify such urges, and in which

the sole purpose of knowledge is to enable such urges to be gratified, merely

reacts, in light of the knowledge that it has, to the directives of instinct. Such a

mind does not act. It does not itself do anything. It merely reacts to instinctual

pressures.



     These reactions are not blind. The exact nature of these reactions is

conditioned by the knowledge stored in that mind. But non-blind reactions are

not actions; and given an organism of the just-mentioned kind, that organism’s

self does nothing. It has no self, as we’ll see; and its instincts, not its non-

existent self, are the real agents. The behaviors in which the organism engages

are compulsive responses to instinct. They are therefore not acts. Put another

way, so far as those behaviors are acts, they are not acts on the organism’s

part, but rather on the part of its instincts.



        The organism’s mind doesn’t act. Its only function is to determine,

in light of its knowledge of the external world, what exact form the organism’s

instinct-directed behaviors must take if those behaviors are not to lead to the

organism’s  being injured or killed. Such a mind’s function is not to act, but only

to ensure that the organism’s reactions to its instincts don’t run afoul of the

forces at work in the external world.          9.1 Selves as minds that have values




   A self is a mind that has values; it is a self whose behaviors are driven

beliefs as to what is of value.  Value-driven acts often involve the gratification of

instinctual urges; indeed, if value-driven acts systematically make it impossible

for such urges to be gratified, the value-system underlying those acts is not a

viable one. Nonetheless, a self is a mind that permits the organism housing it to

behave in a given way only if, in its judgment, that behavior is in compliance

with some value. Of course, its judgments as to what is of value are, and should

be, heavily influenced by its knowledge of what will permit the gratification of

primal urges. But what is relevant is that, in an organism that has a self, as

opposed to a mere mind, it is judgments as to what is of value that lead to

behavior; and it is not, except in the indirect sense just described, urges per se

that do so.



           It  follows  that  selves act. Of course, creatures that are selves

sometimes merely react. But it isn’t as a self a creature reacts. (I am a tennis

player. But it isn’t as a tennis player that I am writing this book.)          



      9.2 Self-consciousness and self-determination



            A story will help us move forward. Smith is a sapient being. (It

doesn’t matter whether Smith is human or not.) Smith can make judgments

as to how it must act in order to discharge its instinctual energies. Like all

judgments, these judgments involve knowledge of principles. So there must

be principles that Smith is aware of and that guide Smith’s thinking. But

given an arbitrary one of these principles, Smith doesn’t know that he has

knowledge of that principle.



       One day, however, Smith becomes aware of at least some of the

principles  that  guide  his  thought.  (How Smith  could  come  to  have  thissecond-order  knowledge  is  discussed  in  Sections  8.0-9.2  of  the  present

work. Let “P” stand for an arbitrary one of the principles that Smith thereby

comes  to  know  himself  to  know.  Let  us  assume  that  Smith  has  these

 
realizations  at  time t.(Though  they’re  experienced  as  mere  feelings,

embodied in these responses are rational judgments as to what to do, given

what Smith’s objectives are (instinct-gratification) and given what he knows

about the circumstances. We must distinguish the instinctual response per

se from the conscious experiences that merely represent it, much as the

icons on your desktop must be distinguished from the patterns of electrical

activity to which they correspond.) Before he knew that he had knowledge

of P, Smith obviously couldn’t make judgments of the form: my judgment

that such and such is consistent with my knowledge of P. Prior to time t,

Smith’s  judgments  were  indeed  guided  by  a  knowledge  of P;  but  he

obviously could not, as of yet, make judgments as to whether his thinking

was being properly guided by his knowledge of P. (One’s thinking can be

misdirected by one’s knowledge of a legitimate principle. This may happen

either because one’s auxiliary assumptions are wrong (e.g., knowing that

gross disparities in wealth lead to injustice and are themselves unjust, but

not knowing that certain ways of eliminating such disparities may lead to

even greater injustices, President Jones destroys the economy in his attempt

to redistribute wealth) or because one’s ability to deploy one’s knowledge of

the principle in question has been blunted by garden-variety performance-

inhibiting factors, such as fatigue and lack of memories.) But, as of time t,

Smith can form judgments as to whether the manner in which he arrives at

judgments is consistent with P. He is thus aware of a norm from which his

thinking mustn’t deviate; and, when such deviations occur, he can make

judgments  as  to  their  nature  and  extent.  He  can  thus  evaluate  his  own

judgments. And his evaluation of them is positive (negative) to the extent

that, to his knowledge, they (fail to) comply with P.



     Integral to the argument just put forth is a delicate but important

distinction. There is a big difference between being aware of a principle and

being aware that one is aware of it. A talented athlete’s behavior embodies

awareness of principles that the athlete doesn’t know himself to be aware

of. The point being made here is not that his behavior accords with someprinciple of which, at every cognitive level, he is ignorant. It is that, although

a knowledge of a given principle may be what is guiding that behavior, the

athlete in question may not be aware of that fact and, indeed, is exceedingly

unlikely to be.



        Philosophers and psychologists often regard an act as being

entirely  “mechanical”  if  it  isn’t  guided  by  knowledge  that  the  agent  can

articulate.  But  it  is  only  when  one  has  second-order  knowledge----

knowledge as to what it is that one knows---that one can articulate what

one knows; and philosophers are therefore likely to regard behaviors that

fail to embody second-order knowledge as failing to embody any knowledge

and, therefore, as being entirely unprincipled. In fact, one needs a certain

amount of verbal dexterity in addition to such second-order knowledge if

one is to be able to articulate the grounds on which they make practically

any one of the decisions that they make.



        Of course, in saying “snow is white," I am not affirming my

knowledge that I know that snow is white; I am talking about snow, not

about my own mind. But, in producing that utterance, I am expressing the

fact that I know that snow is white. And one could very easily know that

snow is white without knowing that one knows it. One can know that snow

is white without having the concept of knowledge. But one must have that

concept to know that one knows that snow is white. So knowledge of P is

different from, and needn’t involve, knowledge that one has knowledge of

P.  Also,  by  virtue  of  having  a  concept  of  knowledge,  one  has  various

concepts---e.g.,  belief,  truth,  mental  activity---not  had  by  an  otherwise

comparable creature that doesn’t have the concept of knowledge.        



      9.3 Actions as value-driven reactions




 Now endowed with knowledge, not just of P, but of the fact that he

has  knowledge  of P,  Smith  doesn’t  react  to  situations;  he  reacts  to  hisreactions to situations. Given a situation, he instinctively makes a judgment.

Aware that his judgment must comply with P, he makes a second judgment.

This second judgment doesn’t concern the situation in question, at least not

directly;  it  concerns  his  initial  judgment  concerning  that  situation.  It

concerns  the  extent  to  which  his  initial  judgment  is  consistent  with  the

principles his knowledge of which eventuated in it.



       Assuming there to be any cognitive dimension to it at all, one’s

response to any given situation is ipso facto principle-driven. But that, by

itself,  isn’t  enough  for  that  response  to  be  an  action,  as  opposed  to  a

reaction. Actions are behaviors that result from judgments about judgments.

Confronted with a situation, one makes an initial judgment. One may then

make a judgment as to whether that initial judgment was consistent with

the principles guiding it. In  other words, having made an initial judgment,

one  may evaluate that  initial  judgment.  One  is  acting,  as  opposed  to

reacting, if one’s behavior expresses such an evaluation. One is reacting, as

opposed to acting, if one’s behavior expresses one’s initial judgment.



            There is no self where there is no ability to act---where there is

no agency. There is no agency, where there is no self. There is no self where

there is no self-evaluation.



            To put this last point in a way that, in addition to being more

precise, doesn’t make it seem viciously circular: there is no self where there

are no judgments as to the integrity of other, co-corporeal judgments.



            Where there are such judgments, there are values. To approve

of (criticize) a judgment is to judge it to have (lack) some value that it ought

to have.



      What directly leads to a bona fide action is never a desire and is

always an attitude of approval towards a desire. Where there are no values,there is no approval or disapproval. So where there are no values, there is

no agency. 



      10.0 Co-corporeal, psychologically integrated mental states enough

for a mind but not for a self   




        Anything  that  has  the  cognitive  wherewithal  to  have  a  series  of

mental states ipso facto has a mind. But there is more to having a self than

there is to being capable of having a series of mental states. Consider Smith

as he is before time t. Each of his mental states could be understood on its

own terms: as a reaction to immediate stimuli. Each of those reactions may

have been intelligent. (In other words, each resulted from cogent reasoning

as to how to discharge the relevant instincts, given the available information

about the environment.) And, supposing that they were intelligent, each was

more likely than not to incorporate the information encoded in previously

occurring, co-corporeal mental states. So, if we think of Smith’s pre-t mind

as a series of links in a chain of events (or conditions), the links in that chain

are  bound  together  not  merely  by  virtue  of  being  co-corporeal  and  not

merely, therefore, by virtue of the earlier being partly causally responsible

for the existence of the later ones,  but by virtue of the fact that (in at least

some cases) the former ones bequeathed the information encoded to them

to the later ones and, therefore, that it was as mental  entities  that  the

earlier ones (in some cases) had a hand in determining the contents of the

later ones.



      10.1 Psychological integrity a prerequisite for moral integrity




  Still, co-corporeality, even when coupled with content-transmission,

isn’t enough for self-hood: supposing that M…M is a series of co-corporeal
                                                    1n

mental states such that, for each i and j, (1 ≤i < j ≤ n), for M…M to form a
                                                                        1nself, as opposed to a mere mind, it is not enough that M be corporeal with
                                                                    i

M; nor it is enough that M help bring about the occurrence of M; nor, most
jij

importantly, is it enough that M do this in the distinctively psychological
                                      i

manner just described.



     A story will help make this clear. There is a group of around 20,000

people, all of whom live on the same land-mass, which we’ll call “LM.” (LM is

big enough that nobody feels crowded but small enough that nobody feels

lonely  and,  more  importantly,  interactions  among  its  occupants  are

frequent.) LM-occupants  all  speak  the  same  language,  and  they  often

exchange information with one another. They also often exchange goods

with, and provide services for, their fellow LM-occupants.



            Being  reasonably  intelligent  and  well-informed  people,  these

people tend to have accurate beliefs; and being reasonably honest people,

they tend to provide one another with accurate information. Also, most of

the time, they’re reasonably honest  not just in their communications with

their fellows, but in their transactions with them. They tend not to defraud

one another.  



    In at least some cases, the ties that LM occupants have to one

another are  deep ones. (For the moment, we’ll set aside cases where LM-

occupants  have  no  significant  ties  to  their  brethren.)  Those  ties  are  not

purely geographical: it isn’t just that the parties involved live in the same

place.  Nor  are  those  ties  purely  causal.  (It  isn’t  just  that LM-occupants

accidentally bump into other LM-occupants, thereby inadvertently changing

the latter’s lives.) The ties in question involve:



                  (i) the fact that one person intentionally transmits

          information that is arrived in a principled manner to some

        other person who makes principled inferences from that

          information,        and:



                  (ii)  the  fact  that  two  people  may  (for  prudential,

        moral,  or  even  libidinal  reasons)  benefit  each  other  by

        honoring an agreement to exchange goods or services.



       One fact about LM’s occupants must be made explicit. There is

nothing regulating their  exchanges  with  one  another.  Should  one LM-

occupant defraud another, there would be no penalties. Given that there

are no laws in LM, the victim would have no legal recourse and he’d have to

take it upon himself to see that justice be done. An LM-occupant who’d

been  misinformed  by  another  would  be  in  the  same  situation mutatis

mutandis. It may be that, because LM’s occupants are so honest with one

another, they’re better off for the fact that their lives aren’t weighed down

by the presence of the regulatory entities that would be needed for there to

be any formal penalties for fraud. 



      But what is relevant here is that, precisely because their lives are

not thus “weighed down," the occupants of LM do not jointly constitute a

nation, at least not in the sense in which France constitutes a nation. There

                                                                        [22]
is nothing under whose jurisdiction the occupants of LM fall.        



      10.2 Minds that are selves and minds that are not




        Bearing  these  points  in  mind,  let  us  turn  our  attention  back  to

M…M, and let us make some further assumptions about that series. The
1n

information  encoded  in M  (1  ≤ i  ≤ n)  is  likely  to  be  accurate.  That
                                i

information, if transmitted to M, (1 ≤ i < j ≤ n), is likely to be transmitted in
                                      j

an accurate form. Moreover, the synthesizing of that information with other

bodies of information (e.g., information currently being uploaded throughthe senses as to the nature of environment in Smith’s vicinity) is likely to

consist  of  inferences  in  which  correctly  understood  correct  rules  of

inferences are correctly applied.



       But----and this is the final, and most important, assumption that

we’ll make about M…M-----none of the members of that series constitute
                      1n

judgments  concerning  the  merits  of  either  the  information-exchanges

occurring among other such members or of the manner in which the beliefs

encoded  therein  are  generated.  Those  exchanges  and  syntheses  of

information  are  not  policed.  It  may  be  that  each  of  the  exchanges  and

inferences in question is done impeccably. But, if so, that isn’t because there

is anything overseeing those operations; it is simply because, despite the

absence  of  any  supervisory  agency,  the  mental  states  involved  in  those

operations happen to satisfy the relevant desiderata. By the same token, if

the  ratiocinative  activity  that  generates M…Mis  inconsistent,  even
                                                        1n 

systematically  so,  with  the  very  principles  embodied  in  that  activity,  no

internal mechanisms  exist  to  ensure  that  the  needed  course-corrections

occur.  The  spuriousness  of  the  reasoning  involved  in M…Mmay  well
                                                                        1n 

ensure that Smith fails in his attempts to gratify his desires.



        But there isn't any internal agency that prevents Smith from

making such mistakes or, therefore, that protects him from the damage to

his person that such mistakes are likely to entail. There is, in other words,

nothing  under  whose  jurisdiction  the  various  members  of M…Mfall.
                                                                              1n   

Nothing  polices  either  the  manner  in  which  members  of  that  series

exchange  or  produce  information  or  the  manner  in  which  that  series

generates new members. Thus, M…M, though constitutive of a mind and
                                        1n

perhaps of something that has an enduring identity in the sense in which a

rock does, doesn’t represent anything that has an enduring identity in the

distinctive sense in which a human being does.       



      11.0 How minds become selves      Let’s  revisit,  and  duly  extend,  what  we  said  earlier  about

Smith/M…M. At time t, it will be recalled, that series generates a mental
        1n

state that embodies a judgment as to the fitness of (some of) the activities

by  which  that  series  has  thus  far  arrived  at  judgments.    An  internal

regulatory agency is thereby born.



            That agency will inhibit the conversion of impulses into actions.

This does not mean that it will simply thwart those impulses. It means that

if, once that agency scrutinizes a given impulse, that agency judges it to be

one worth acting upon, then it will lift the inhibition. But, for the reasons

given in Section 3.3., the aforementioned impulse isn’t the proximal cause of

the body-movements that result from the lifting of such an inhibition. 



       Even before M…M became to any degree self-policing, the
                                  1n

activity  constituting M…M  embodied  knowledge,  not  of  some  one
                            1n

principle, but of many. So  for that activity to become systematically self-

policing, it must be guided by a knowledge of many different second-order

principles of the sort previously described. But it’s a distinct possibility that

not all of those second-order principles will be consistent with one another.

As  a  result,  an  analogue  of  the  process  that  led  to  Smith’s  acquiring

knowledge  of  those  second-order  principles  will  lead  him  to  acquire

knowledge of third order principles, the purpose of which knowledge being

to  ensure  that  the  totality  of  second–order  principles  guiding  Smith’s

mentation be a coherent one---that those principles not be such that, when

complied with, the result is that it is judged de rigueur to lift the inhibition

on some impulse and also de rigueur not to lift that inhibition. Second-order

principles that don’t fit in with the rest are weeded out; they are no longer

countenanced.  For  the  same  reason,  second-order  principles are

countenanced  that  were  not  previously  so.  So  far  as  this  enterprise  is

successful, the result is an integrated body of principles, any two of which

are  consistent  with  each  other,  under  whose  jurisdiction  falls  all  of  the

activity  constitutive  of  Smith’s  decisions  as  to  how  to  act.  So,  given  the

reasonable presumption that, at this stage, none of Smith’s mental activity ispurely theoretical, all of it being oriented towards instinct-gratification, this

means that this enterprise, so far as it’s successful, yields a single, cohesive

regulatory  agency  under  whose  jurisdiction all of  Smith’s  mental  activity

falls.



      Just as group of people who live in the same place don’t become

a state until  their  activities  come  to  fall  under  the  jurisdiction  of  some

regulatory agency, so a group of co-corporeal, informationally integrated

thoughts  don’t  necessarily  constitute  a  self  until they  all  fall  under  the

jurisdiction  of  a  regulatory  agency.  Before  that  happens,  there  are  no

actions, only reactions; after it happens, there are actions. We finally have

an agent and, therefore, a self.  



      12.0 The concept of intrinsic value in relation to the concept of

selfhood




  With the inception of selfhood, values replace desires. Under the

growing  power  of  a  supervisory  structure  of  the  just-discussed  kind,  the

various constituents of that mind become increasingly unified: the structure

they form becomes more and more of a self. (Incidentally, a consequence of

this last statement, and therefore of our analysis, is that there are degrees

of self-hood. This redounds to the credit of our analysis, since---so I argue in

Identity---selfhood does come in degrees.) Certainly, the initial purpose of

this supervisory superstructure was to maximize the amount of instinctual

gratification enjoyed by the mind falling within its power. And, surely, that

always remains one of its purposes. Indeed, it arguably always remains its

primary purpose (though, for reasons I’m about to state, I personally don’t

think this).



            But  that  superstructure  has  needs  of  its  own;  and,  as  that

superstructure  develops,  it  becomes  increasingly  difficult  to  find  an

instinctual basis for those needs and increasingly necessary to understandthem on their own terms.



      12.1 Some preliminaries




      Before we can see what exactly this claim amounts to, or, therefore,

why it’s true, we must make preliminary points of a general nature as to the

nature of the supervisory agency in which we have claimed the essence of

selfhood to lie. There are some impulses that, if acted on, would weaken the

integrity of this supervisory agency. Tautologously, this agency, so far as it’s

in good working order, will inhibit such impulses. But little harm will come to

that agency if it’s too good at its job---if it inhibits impulses that it could,

without in any way jeopardizing its own authority, allow to be expressed in

action. If that agency is too good at its job---that is, if it’s too conservative, if

it inhibits impulses that, erring on the side of caution, it needn’t inhibit—the

result will be merely a forfeiture of pleasure; it will not, at least not in the

short term (or even the medium term), do any damage to itself or to the

structures responsible for the mentation falling in its jurisdiction. 



            As  a  result,  this  supervisory  agency  comes  to  be  overly

restrictive: it disapproves of the disinhibition of impulses that ought to be

disinhibited. So far as those inhibited impulses are permitted gratification, it

is  only  on  the  condition  that  they  assume  such  forms  that,  if  acted  on,

consolidate this agency’s power over the course of mental activity falling

into its jurisdiction. In some cases, it is possible for those impulses to assume

such forms. (This is what Freud referred to as “sublimation.” My aggressive

instincts are discharged by my writing treatises that aggressively critique the

views of my colleagues.) In other cases, this is not possible.



        This leads to what Freud calls “neurosis”: an inhibition of

impulses that cannot be discharged in ways that are in keeping with one’s

values but that, because they are so strong, must come out in some way or

other and are forced to be expressed as symptoms. Since symptoms areunintentional, neurosis involves an abridgment of agency. One would have

been better off yielding to the impulse and discharging it agentially, instead

of forcing to find non-agential ways of discharging itself. (Freud makes this

point in his (1926) book Symptoms, Inhibitions, and Anxiety. As he puts it:

somebody riding a horse must sometimes let the horse go where it wants to

go, lest the horse cease to let the rider have any control over it.) 



      12.2 Two Illustrations of Our Thesis that what is Valuable is what

consolidates one's Agency




        Illustration #1: We see Bach’s music as being more valuable than

Eminem’s.  (Eminem  is  a  pop-star.)  Why?  First  of  all,  the  enjoyment  of

Eminem’s  music  is  easily  traced  back,  by  way  of  multiple  pathways,  to

enjoyment of the sexual act, it being largely for that reason that we enjoy

Eminem’s music. By contrast, it is not because of any obvious connection

that Bach’s music has to the sexual act that we enjoy it. The pleasure Bach’s

music gives us is more akin to the pleasure given us by a philosophical or

mathematical  insight than it is to the (sub-agential) pleasures given to us by

the sexual act. Implicated in the experience of listening to Bach’s music, and

largely constitutive of the pleasure it brings us, are ratiocinative abilities that

have no obvious connection to sexual gratification, or to any other form of

instinctual  gratification,  and  that do have  obvious  connections  to  the

rational operations on which the supervisory agency in question depends to

consolidate  and  extend  the  hegemony  it  has  over  the  course  of  mental

activity. Bach’s music is studied in conservatories; it is performed in places

(e.g.,  concert-halls)  where  the  operative  norms  of  conduct  require

tremendous  self-restraint---where  one  has  to  sit  still  for  hours  on  end,

where one must speak to others in a very controlled manner, and where one

must display all of the asceticism involved in the transformation of instinct-

driven proto-humans into instinct-suppressing actual humans.



       When people say that Eminem’s music is as highly “valued” asBach’s, so far as what they are saying is true, they are saying in a distorted

way that Eminem’s music is liked as much as Bach’s. And there’s no doubt

that (at this juncture in history) there are more Eminem fans than there are

Bach fans (that said, pop-stars are seldom liked solely for the merits of their

music); and it may be that, during its brief recess from oblivion, Eminem’s

music is a source of more pleasure (not pleasure per capita, but aggregate

pleasure) than Bach’s music. But, in saying that Eminem’s music is more

highly valued than Bach’s, one is confusing the concept of pleasure, and the

related concept of desire, with the very different concept of value.



        Illustration  #2:  People  enjoy  reading  (and  writing)  philosophical

treatises. To become capable of this sort of enjoyment, one must alter one’s

psychological  structure  in  non-trivial  ways.  In  order  to  pull  off  the

remodeling  of  one’s  intellect  needed  to  become  at  all  adept  at  this

discipline, or therefore to derive any enjoyment from it, one must suspend

gratification of urges that one would otherwise gratify, and one must do so

without having any firm assurance that, in due course, one will be able to

enjoy gratifications as intense as those that one has foregone. Because it

takes a long time to acquire the philosophical acumen needed to make the

reading, let alone the writing, of philosophical works more pleasurable than

painful, and because during that long period otherwise fecund sources of

instinctual gratification are off-limits, one must, if one has chosen to acquire

that degree of acumen, develop a certain asceticism. One must come to

devalue (some forms of) instinctual gratification and to hyper-value the self-

control  that  comes  with  becoming  capable  of  suspending  instinctual

gratification.



      This is not to say that the enjoyment of philosophical discourse

has no instinctual foundation. Like Nietzsche, I believe that the enjoyment

one  derives  from  the  exercise  of  one’s  intellect  is  a  form,  or  at  least  a

derivative, of the instinctual pleasure one receives from having power over

others and acting aggressively towards them. But, supposing this correct,

the  way  in  which,  by  virtue  of  engaging  in  philosophical  discourse,  one

discharges  these  primitive  impulses  is  contingent  on  one’s  exercisingfaculties that, being purely ratiocinative, are much less directly connected

with instinct-gratification than they are with the inhibitions of instinct so

essential  to  the  existence,  and  to  the  consolidation,  of  the  supervisory

agency in which the essence of selfhood lies.



      The same point mutatis mutandis holds of the pleasure one

derives from very sophisticated forms of music. Bach’s music is passionate,

and the passion embodied in it arguably has a sexual basis. But Bach’s music

expresses that passion in an extremely controlled and ratiocination-heavy

manner; and the faculty underlying the ratiocinative component of Bach’s

music is one and the same with the faculty underlying the instinct-inhibitory

ratiocinations constitutive of the regulatory agency that is one’s self.      



      12.3 Selfhood a matter of degree




     Some minds are more intact than others. In this respect, minds

are like nations. The official government of Pakistan has uncontested control

over some areas and only little or no control over others. Thus, the landmass

coincident with the nation of Pakistan is less unified than it would be if the

loyalties  of  its  occupants  weren’t  fragmented  by  the  para-governmental

agencies  that  occupy  it.  By  contrast,  the  landmass  coincident  with  the

continental  United  States can be  said  to  fall  under  the  more  or  less

uncontested jurisdiction of some one government, the same being true of

the  discontinuous  landmass  that  is  formed  when  Hawaii  and  Alaska  are

added. Therefore, the landmass coincident with the U.S. is more of a nation

than  the  landmass  coincident  with  Pakistan.  Thus,  nationhood  comes  in

degrees. x is more of a nation than y if x’s government does a better job

than y’s government of unifying the occupants of the landmass falling in its

jurisdiction. 



     It is for similar reasons that one mind can be more of a self than

another. If the regulatory agency governing mind x has more scope andpower than its counterpart in mind y, then x is more of a self than y.  



          That  our  analysis  has  the  consequences  that  self-hood  isn’t

equally distributed among minds is to its credit. People’s selves disintegrate.

And there are degrees of integratedness (i.e., of non-disintegratedness), as

everyday  experience  makes  obvious  and  as  clinical  observation  of  the

mentally ill makes even more obvious.



      13.0 The identity-theoretic underpinnings of the concept of

psychopathy



                In  the  remaining  sections  of  this  book,  we  will  discuss

psychopathic disturbances of agency. To this end, we must consolidate some

of  the  points  already  made  concerning  the  structure  and  formation  of

distinctively human psychological architectures.



       A mind is a collection of structures such that



                  (i) those structures create and direct mental activity;



      and such that 



                  (ii) if X and X are any two of those structures, one of
                        1n

        two  conditions  is  satisfied:  (i)  at  least  one  of  them  can

        directly transmit the information stored in it to the other

        faculty; (ii) there is a set of faculties X, X…X such that, for
                                                      12n

        each i (1≤ i ≤ n), X can directly transmit the information it
                              i

        bears to X.
                    i+1              (i) is self-explanatory; but (ii) requires clarification. In order for

you to acquire information as to what I believe (or hope or fear, etc.), one of

three conditions must be met:



                  (a)  I  must  engage  in  overt  bodily  behaviors  (e.g.,

        laughing, throwing furniture around) on the basis of which

        you can make a reasonable inference as to the nature of my

          ideation at that time. 



                  (b) I must engage in behaviors that that result in ink-

        deposits,  bursts  of  noise,  or  otherwise  publicly  knowable

        entities, that you can interpret as being thus indicative.



                (c) I must engage behaviors of the sort described in

        (a)  and  (b)  that,  although  you  do  not  personally  witness

        them, initiate a testimonial-sequence of which you are on the

        receiving end.



        Thus, the exchange of information between minds involves non-

mental  intermediaries  and,  for  that  reason,  is  in  some  important  sense

“indirect.”



         But information-transmissions that occur within a mind is either

direct or,  if indirect, consists solely of direct information-transmissions (i.e. that

consist of sequences of information-transmissions, each one of which is direct,

even though, obviously, those direct transmissions jointly constitute an indirect

transmission).  I  know  that  Jerry  is  a  vicious  and  prolific  murderer.  All  of  a

sudden, I see Jerry’s grinning face pressed against my window. The result: I’m

afraid. (I wouldn’t have reacted with fear if my pre-existing belief had been to

the effect that Jerry was a harmless prankster who, in his attempts to be funny,

pressed his grinning face against people’s windows.) Clearly, the information

encoded in my knowledge about Jerry is “pooled” with the contents of mysense-perception,  that  being  why  I  am  struck  by  fear.  That  pooling  occurs

without  anyone’s  engaging  in  any  overt  behaviors  and,  therefore,  without

anyone’s  employing  any  symbolic  intermediaries.  The  one  mental  entity’s

contents directly merge with the other person's mental contents.



        The fact that these two bodies of information can merge thus

directly is not a consequence of their both belonging to the same mind: it is

constitutive of their belonging to the same mind.  Two mental entities whose

contents are thus related ipso facto both “belong” to some one mind.



         Of course, there are distinct mental entities that belong to some

one mind that are not as directly related to each other as are the two just-

mentioned  mental  entities.  For  example,  none  of  the  mental  entities

constitutive of my mind in 1987 is related in that way to any given one of my

current mental contents. And there are mental entities in my mind right at this

very moment that are not thus interrelated. But, given one of those 1987-

mental entities, how are its contents pooled with those of a given one of my

2010 mental contents? Through overt behaviors on my (or somebody else’s)

part? No. Through symbolic intermediaries? No. The pooling is accomplished

via a series of mental states S…S such that S’s contents directly merge with
                                  1n1

those  of  the  aforementioned  1987  mental  entity,  such  that S’s  contents
                                                                            n

directly merge with those of the aforementioned 2010 mental entity, and such

that, for each i, the contents of S directly merge with those of S. The same
                                      ii+1

thing mutatis mutandis is true of any two mental entities that simultaneously

inhabit a given mind but that, perhaps because the one’s position in that mind

is remote from the other’s, cannot pool their contents with the directness with

which my knowledge of Jerry and my sense-perception of Jerry’s pale, grinning

face can pool their contents.



        Of course, a given mental entity may fail to leave a trace of itself

and may thus fail to transmit its contents to other mental entities belonging to

the same mind, and the contents of two mental entities that simultaneouslybelong to a given mind may fail to be pooled together. But were such a pooling

of contents to occur, it would be through a series of mental states of the just-

described  kind;  it  would not be  through  non-symbolic  intermediaries  (e.g.,

overt behaviors). 



         It incoherent to hold that, underlying the various wasps that

compose a swarm of wasps, there is some entity, this entity being the swarm

per  se,  to  which  those  various  wasps belong but  of  which  they  are  not

constitutive. It is similarly incoherent to suppose that, underlying the contents

of a given mind, there is some “self” that has those contents but is distinct

from them. Were such a thing to exist, its presence wouldn't enable wrongly

interrelated  mental  entities  to  belong  to  the  same  mind,  and  its  absence

wouldn't prevent appropriately interrelated ones from belonging to the same

mind. Such a thing would do nothing and would therefore be nothing.



      14.0 Desires vs. values



         Bearing in mind the points just made, let M be some mind (notice

that I did not use the word “self”), and let S…S be the series of aggregates of
                                                  1n

mental entities constituting M. In every respect but one, M is just like a human

mind. Being housed in a suitably equipped body, M can see things, touch them,

etc., and it can thus acquire information concerning the external world. Being

rational, M has the ability to draw inferences from that information that enable

it to gratify its desires. And, because the body housing it is in good working

order, it can act on the intentions to which those inferences lead. But M values

nothing. This is the one respect in which it differs from (most) human minds. M

wants things, one of those things being to survive.



     But M, we will suppose, values nothing. M sometimes seems to

value things; for there are things that it wants that don’t have any obvious

survival-value and that don’t relate in any obvious way to the gratification of its

urges. But, in such cases, M believes the thing in question to conduce to thegratification of its desires; and so far as M appears to value it for its own sake, it

is  only  because M isn’t  disclosing  why  it  believes  that  thing  to  be  thus

conducive. 



     There is a sense in which M has a concept of self-improvement. If it

knows that acquiring the ability to sing well will, for some reason or other,

enable it to gratify some desire that it cannot otherwise gratify, M can resolve

to learn to sing well. In general, if M knows that, in order to gratify some urge

that it has, it has to change itself in such and such a way, M is able to resolve to

make that change. But, beyond that, M cannot possibly have any concept of

self-improvement. To improve oneself is to change oneself in such a way that

one  comes  closer  to  satisfying  some  standard  that  one  has  that,  for  that

reason, one judges to endow one with more value than one had previously.

Given that, by hypothesis, M values nothing, it thus has no conception of self-

improvement apart from the strictly prudential one just described. 



      It follows that all of M’s actions are really reactions. It has desires—it

wants to eat, sleep, and so on. Changes in circumstances sometimes bring

about  changes  in  what M has  to  do  to  gratify  these  desires;  and M is

reasonably  adept  at  making  the  needed  changes.  But,  given  that M values

nothing, M cannot possibly aspire to make any changes to itself that aren’t

intended to gratify some base urge. So any given action on M’s part that isn’t a

direct attempt to gratify a base urge is an indirect attempt to so. Each of M’s

actions  falls  into  one  of  two  categories:  either  it’s  an  attempt  (possibly  a

successful  one)  to  eat  or  sleep  (or  some  such)  or  it’s  an  attempt  to  do

something that, in its judgment, it must to do in order to eat or sleep (or some

such). M’s conduct is always reactive.



          So far as M has a self, it does nothing other than mediate

between, on the one hand, M’s urges and, on the other hand, M’s beliefs as to

what, given the circumstances, must be done if those urges are to be gratified.        By  virtue  of  having  no  values, M is necessarily incapable of

understanding  much  that  creatures  with  values,  but  that  are  otherwise

comparable  to M,  are  capable  of  understanding. M won’t  really  have  the

concept of friendship. (M will have a concept of a strategic alliance, but not of

friendship.) M won’t understand why Smith chose a non-lucrative and difficult

career path over a lucrative and easy one. M cannot possibly have any concept

of intrinsic, as opposed to purely instrumental, value. 



     The essence of the human condition will elude M. He feels nothing

that  involves  an  ability  to  value  something  for  its  own  sake.  He  can  feel

frustration (because his efforts to find food are unsuccessful); he can feel rage

(towards those who stand between him and the successful execution of his

machinations). But he doesn’t love anybody; he doesn’t even like anybody. And

there is nothing towards which he aspires.



       M has no concept of legitimacy. There are desirable outcomes and

there are undesirable outcomes. But nothing is any more right than anything

else.



      14.1 Desires vs. values (continued)



       Some other facts about M deserve mention. M values nothing and

therefore doesn’t value the truth, at least not for its own sake. He values the

truth only to the extent that, in his judgment, knowledge of it will help him

gratify his desires. 



       For purely strategic reasons, M may learn to ‘hit the right notes’---

to say the right things. In fact, since there isn’t anything that he wants to do or,

therefore, to say that he doesn’t believe to be to his strategic advantage, he’ll

do his best to do and say the ‘right’ things; unlike actual people, whose deeds

and utterances ‘come from the heart’ and, therefore, are often not strategic,

M,  though in  actuality completely  heartless,  will  strike  many  as  having  anexceptionally pure heart. M always says the correct thing, as opposed to the

human thing. He says what he believes it to be to his practical advantage to say,

given what he has learned about human nature from his examination of it.



       It is from an outsider's perspective that M examines people. It is

thus to be expected that M's analysis of human nature will be hollow and off-

the-mark. At the same time, M's analysis will strike less acute observers as

unusually cogent. And, ironically, this is precisely because M is so blind to how

people really are. Being incapable of saying anything substantive about the

human mind, M will be forced to produce an analysis that is formally good, a

corollary  being  that  his  analysis  will  be  free  of  the  ragged  edges  and

inconsistencies that vitiate analyses put forth by people who, unlike M, have

access to far more psychological data than can possibly be embodied in a few

well-manicured truisms.



      Also, in attempting to describe the human mind, M will be his forced

by his lack of psychological insight to give undue weight to what people say

about themselves. What a person says about himself doesn't reflect who he is

so much as it reflect who wants to be and who, depending how convinced he is

by his own rationalizations, believes himself to be. Thus, M's descriptions of

people will be consonant with their self-serving rationalizations and congenial

to their fragile emotional integrations. As a result, they will strike people as

accurate  and  heartening.    By  contrast,  somebody  who  is  psychologically

insightful will see people for who they are; and depending on how much stock

people put in their own narratives, such a person's psychological analyses strike

people as false or threatening and will be rejected either way. 



        14.1.1 Desires vs. values (continued)



      A corollary of the fact that M doesn’t value truth for its own sake, is

that  he  doesn’t negatively value  falsehood  for  its  own  sake.  He  has  no

inhibitions, other than purely prudential ones, to accepting anything, so long as

he thinks that, by doing so, he stands to come out ahead.     Granting that most people are dishonest to some degree---a very

high degree, in most cases---they value truth for its own sake. This doesn’t

necessarily mean that they’ll tell the truth or that they’ll (consciously) accept it

when they see it. But it means that a high, non-prudential regard for truth is

operative within them and, in some way or other, will affect what they say, do,

and feel. If they lie, they’ll feel guilty; and what they refuse to accept but

believe deep down often comes out in their actions. (They refuse to believe

that Smith is an evil man and have but kind words to say about him. But they

just can’t find it in themselves to go visit him in the hospital when he’s sick,

they forget to pick him up at the airport, etc.)



      But it goes without saying that much of the time, a person’s high

regard for truth is expressed in his telling the truth. I’ve heard many a police

officer  say  that  criminals want to tell you the truth. Freud said that what a

person doesn’t explicitly say ‘oozes’ (Freud’s own term) out of him; he fidgets;

he unwittingly spins what he believes to be purely fictitious yarns that, when

the names are changed, are precisely what the individual in question is trying

to keep a lid on. (I don’t know whether Freud or the aforementioned police

officers had psychopaths in mind when they made these statements. I suspect

that they were thinking of non-psychopaths who were dissembling.)



   The reason that truth-serum (sodium pentothal) works so well is that

it lowers the inhibitions that one has to erect, and expend considerable energy

maintaining, in order to prevent the truth from pouring out of one’s mouth.

People  are  fundamentally  truthful---even  those  that  lie  99%  of  the  time.  I

personally believe that very little of what people say is completely sincere and

that  the  pervasiveness  of  mendacity  cannot  be  overstated.  But  that  isn’t

because people don’t value the truth for its own sake. It’s because, in addition

to valuing the truth, they value their own welfare; and their concern for their

own welfare overpowers their wish to tell the truth. But, echoing what we just

said,  this  doesn’t  mean  that  a  non-psychopathic  liar  has  successfully

decommissioned his regard for the truth. His high valuation of it comes out in

rearguard ways: he feels guilty; he volunteers at an orphanage (to alleviate his

feelings  of  guilt);  he  is  an  unremittingly  faithful  husband;  and,  mostimportantly, the (non-psychopathic) liar will, at least  at  some  level,  keep  a

mental  record  of  the  truth,  this  being,  at  least  in  this  context,  the  most

important  difference  between  non-psychopaths,  be  they  liars  are  or  truth-

tellers, and psychopaths.



      15.0 These points in relation to psychopathy



        M is what is known as a “psychopath.” This is because, for M, what

is true has no more (non-instrumental) value than what is untrue, and the

essence of psychopathy lies is a complete failure to regard the truth as having

any non-instrumental value. Whereas the non-psychopath keeps a mental log

of the truth and, since he genuinely values the truth for its own sake, does so

even when he doesn’t judge there to be any practical reason to know the truth,

M keeps a log of the truth only to the extent that, in his judgment, doing so is a

practical necessity.



       This fact about M leads to no end of trouble for him. It’s very hard

to know which truths will be of use and which one’s won’t. So it’s extremely

easy to make false judgments as to which truths are, and which ones are not,

worth logging.



        By the same reasoning mutatis mutandis, it’s hard (or, strictly

speaking, impossible) to know exactly which falsehoods are worth regarding as

truths---or, in any case, as operational truths---and which ones are not. Since

M’s  commitment  to  keeping  the  facts  straight  extends  no  further  than  his

conviction that it is in his practical interest to do so, and since it is hard to know

which facts are the ones that are relevant to one’s designs or a fortiori exactly

how they are thus relevant, M often has no mental record of the facts. These

gaps themselves change what it is to M’s practical advantage to believe.



         Since, by obvious extensions of the points just made, these gaps in

M’s  knowledge  tend  to  spread, M is  forced  to  have  an  extremely  flexiblerelationship to the truth; M’s failure to see the truth as having any intrinsic

(non-strategic) value has the consequence that the purely instrumental value

that the truth has for M tends to shrink with the passage of time.



          15.1 These points in relation to psychopathy (continued)



         For these reasons, M’s “narrative”---what he tells both himself and

others---isn’t consistent.  In fact, M’s narrative is as mercurial as the weather. M

has  no  stable  self-concept.  M values nothing. Apart from his having certain

base desires, there is nothing fixed about M’s personality. Consequently, M’s

personality changes every time he judges there to be a reason to change the

manner in which he attempts to gratify those desires. His personality thus

changes every time he judges there to be a change in his circumstances that is

relevant to the methods he must employ to gratify his desires.



      This means that M’s personality is as fleeting as a summer breeze.

And this, in its turn, means that M doesn’t really have a personality. He doesn’t

really have a self. He has base desires; he has (mis)information as to how to

gratify  those  desires;  and  he  has  intentions  corresponding  to  that

(mis)information. But that’s all he has. He is whatever circumstances require

him to be. So he is a Potemkin village---an empty suit, a mask covering, not a

face, but a void. M is a mind, clearly, but M is not a self; for it no more makes

sense to speak of a self that changes with every decision-relevant change in

circumstances than it does to speak of a square circle. A self is, by definition,

what remains, or tends to remain, constant throughout the changes in the

circumstances in which one is operating.



            In  the  last  section  of  this  book,  I  discuss  some  famous

psychopaths.



          15.2 Who does the psychopath fool?         Even though everyone lies, the non-psychopath tends to speak

from the heart and thus to say what he believes, as opposed to what others

want to hear. The psychopath has no tendency at all to say what he believes.

For he has no heart and, therefore, no heart to speak from.  Since, therefore,

his only reasons for speaking are strategic, he says what people want to hear.

For this reason, even though the psychopath doesn't have a heart, he is more

likely than others to strike people as having an exceptionally pure one.



              But the psychopath doesn’t fool everybody. He only fools only

those who fall into one of two categories:



                  (i) Those who simply lack the acumen to see through

        his chicanery



        and



                  (ii) Those who, because of special circumstances, have

        an emotional incentive not to see through it.



        Among those falling into the second category are



                  (a) Those who are themselves children or parents of

          psychopaths



      and



                  (b) Those who, having been brutalized in some way

        or  other,  possibly  by  some other psychopath,  find  much

        needed solace in his trite blandishments and thus have an

          emotional  need  to  believe  in  the  authenticity  of  their        source.



             Those not thus blinded will see hollow performances in the

psychopath’s noble deeds and empty clichés in  his  insights.  In  due  course,

those  who  see  through  the  psychopath  are  likely  to  see  that  there  isn’t  a

person behind the mask, only a proto-person who believes in nothing, values

nothing, and is nothing, and who, so far as he isn’t trying to convince himself

and others otherwise, aspires only to gratify base animalistic urges and quasi-

human derivatives thereof, such as a need (not a desire—a need) for adulation

or wealth.   



      16.0 Sociopathy vs. psychopathy vs. non-sociopathic, non-

psychopathic criminality




      The terms “sociopath” and “psychopath” are frequently used.

Unfortunately, most people, without knowing that they are doing so, tend to

use each of those terms to refer to three very different classes of people:



                  (1) Those who don’t have consciences at all; 



                  (2)  Those  who  have  consciences  but  whose

          consciences have been corrupted by rationalization;



        and:



                  (3)  Those  who  have  consciences,  and  whose

          consciences have not been corrupted by rationalization (or,

          necessarily, by anything else) but who are evil.     The result is that these three conditions, each of which is both

psychologically  and  ethically  very  different    from  each  of  the  others,  are

 
lumped together. 



     People in Category 1 are psychopaths. Before we talk about what

psychopathy  is,  we  must  talk  about  what  it  isn’t.  Psychopathy  must  be

distinguished from psychosis. Psychosis is the psychological disorganization that

results when there is a lowering of the inhibitions that ordinarily limit the

freedom  with  which  different  parts  of  the  psyche  exchange  information.  A

possible consequence of psychosis, but not an inevitable one, is a ‘break from

reality’: the psychotic ceases to be able to distinguish between reality and

fantasy. But, it must be stressed, such breaks from reality (which may, or may

not, include hallucinations), are a by-product of psychosis, not the essence of it.

(Incidentally, the hallucinations in question are usually auditory, not visual.)

Psychotics are as likely as non-psychotics to have consciences. So psychosis is

not  psychopathy.  Having  cleared  this  up,  we  will  now  clear  up  some

widespread misconceptions about psychopathy.



      When people of my nationality and approximate age hear the term

“psychopath," they tend to think of Dr. Hannibal Lecter---the evil super-genius

in the move Silence of the Lambs. The character of Hannibal Lecter is fictional

in every possible sense. There is no real person on whose character his is

modeled; and, human psychology being what it is, there couldn’t possibly be

such a person. He is about as unrealistic a character as one could imagine. He

bears  no  resemblance  to  psychopaths---or,  really,  to  anyone  else.  There  is

nothing  to  be  learned  from  the  character  of  Hannibal  Lecter  about

psychopathy,  psychopathology,  or  (setting  aside  the  fact  he  has  certain

extremely generic traits in common with actual human beings;, e.g., he doesn’t

like being in a cage) human psychology generally.



              A related point is that history’s great evil-doers are seldom, if

ever, psychopaths. Stalin, for example, was not a psychopath. For reasons that

we’ll now discuss, psychopaths don’t have the attention-span to do what Stalindid and they cannot experience hatred, or any other emotion, with the depth

with which Stalin did.



       One’s conscience has many functions. In certain cases, under

certain circumstances, one such function is to prevent one from acting in anti-

social ways. But that isn’t the only function of conscience or even the primary

one.  Non-psychopathic  individuals  hold  themselves  to  standards.  One’s

conscience  is  the  part  of  one’s  mind  that  stores  one’s  standards  and  that

punishes one if one falls short of them. The standards in question may not be

morally good ones. To make the same point, but in a way that doesn’t prejudge

any moral questions: those standards may be ones that, if complied with, hurt

others more than they help them and (what is a related, but not a coincident,

fact)    tend  to  undermine  the  social  institutions  on  which  people’s  welfare

depends.



        But speaking from a psychological, as opposed to an ethical,

viewpoint, there is all the difference in the world between, on the one hand,

holding oneself to “bad” standards, whatever that means, and, on the other

hand, holding oneself to no standards. Were it not for the standards to which

we hold ourselves, we wouldn’t have selves to begin with. Creatures that don’t

hold themselves to standards may have minds---but they don’t selves.



              To understand how selves can be different from minds, we must

first state some basic truths relating to what minds are. The points about to be

made (in Section 4.1) may initially seem purely digressive and irrelevant. But

their relevance will soon become clear.



          16.1 Why psychopaths are dysfunctional



         M is a very pure example of psychopathy. Actual psychopaths tend

to have some values. They like to tinker with cars, to build model airplanes, or

whatnot. But the minds of actual psychopaths differ surprisingly little from M.       There is one respect in which actual psychopaths resemble M that

deserves special mention: like M, they have an extremely flexible relationship

to the truth. (Psychopaths are unusually likely to be able to pass lie-detector

tests. This isn’t because they are good liars. It’s because----setting aside the

rationalization-proof  deliverances  of  their current,  as  opposed  to  their

remembered, sense-perceptions---a psychopath’s relationship to the truth is so

elastic that there isn’t anything that he believes. So the psychopath doesn't

have to lie. For the psychopath, some beliefs are more useful than others; so,

for him, there is operational truth and falsehood. But there is no such thing as

truth and falsehood simpliciter. Thus, psychopaths don’t have to lie. They can

pass  lie  detectors  because,  to  them,  the  distinctions  between  truth  and

falsehood,  and  therefore  between  honesty  and  fraud,  are  purely  technical

ones. 



        Since for this reason a psychopath’s grasp on the truth is so

tenuous, he is very unlikely to succeed in life. His fakery, braggadocio, and

showmanship often make him appear in his youth and early adulthood to be

success-bound;  and  sometimes  he  achieves  success,  at  least  in  a  narrow

professional sense. But their careers tends to fall apart. The highly conditional

nature of their commitment to the truth forces them to make decisions on the

basis of an unduly constricted body of knowledge, the results being that they

are likely to commit horrible gaffes that alienate them from institutions within

which one has to operate to succeed.



       Also, because their grasp of the truth is so feeble, they are prone to

act impulsively and, therefore, to commit acts that, to any non-psychopath,

would  obviously  have  consequences  for  them  of  the  most  adverse  kind.

According to  Hervey Cleckley, whose book The Mask of Sanity is undoubtedly

the best one on the subject of psychopathy, they do not do this because of an

unconscious sense of guilt. There is, Cleckley says, no independent evidence

that any such force is operative in these people. My own experience strongly

supports Cleckley’s contention.           16.1.1 Why psychopaths are dysfunctional (continued)



       A related point is that psychopaths are extraordinarily bad at

 
learning from their mistakes.They  make  the  same  mistakes  over  and  over

again. They always have a story. And those stories often seem cogent when

taken in isolation from one another and when considered in abstraction of the

psychopath’s  back  story.  But  their  stories---which,  in  my  experience,  they

describe using words such as “cogent," “rigorous,"   and “scientific”---turn out

to  be  models  of  flimsy  reasoning  from  half-true  premises;  and  they  have

nothing more than a veneer of cogency, which, on the rare occasions when you

can pin them down, are easily penetrated.



              Psychopaths  thus  bear  no  resemblance  to  Hannibal  Lecter  and

other Hollywood villains who are often (mis)characterized as “psychopaths”;

and they bear no resemblance to similarly mischaracterized, real  life villains,

such as Stalin and Mao.



       Psychopaths are dysfunctional. They can pull off cons. But that is

pretty much all they can do. They can put on a good show for a while. They are

charming, at least at first; they are, or seem to be, witty; and they often strike

one as exceedingly intelligent and learned.



 
         But psychopaths are like a house of cards.To borrow a simile used

by  Mary  Aston  in  her  novel The Incredible Charlie Carewe, which depicts a

psychopath, psychopaths are to people what snake-skins are to snakes. For one

thing, the proverbial charm of the psychopath’s is doubly fraudulent. First of all,

it hides their absolute indifference to others. Second, at the end of the day,

they aren’t charming.  Or,  rather, they aren’t charming: it is the people from

whom they plagiarize that are charming. More often than not, a psychopath’s

genuinely  witty  comments  turn  out  to  have  been  lifted.    And,  when  a

psychopath’s attempts at charm don’t involve plagiarism, it isn’t witty at all,

consisting as it does of stale clichés and curiously two-dimensional pseudo-apercus.



      16.2 The psychopath's veneer of intelligence



       These points mutatis mutandis hold of the psychopath's proverbial

intelligence. Psychopaths are more likely than non-psychopaths to show-case

what  they  know,  and  they're  more  likely  than  non-psychopaths  to  choose

endeavors that will lead to results they can show-case. Given a particular field,

the psychopath will learn just enough to convince non-experts that he's an

expert in it. If he knows that a given person is an expert in a certain field, he'll

avoid that topic when talking with him or he'll avoid that person altogether.

What the psychopath lacks in actual insight, he makes up for in plagiarized

insights. What he lacks in both actual and plagiarized insights, he makes up for

in his delivery. Psychopaths are long on delivery and short on content. A lecture

given by a psychopath is likely to strike those who attend it as profound and to

strike those who read transcripts of it as curiously hollow. 



      I would like to quote from Robert Lindner’s (1944) classic Rebel

Without  a  Cause (no  relation  to  the  movie  of  the  same  name,  which  it

predates):



      In the literature on [psychopathy] frequent

          mention  is  made  of  the  “high”  intelligence  of

              psychopaths…However  derived,  these  notions  are

            misleading  or  at  least  insufficient  to  serve  either  as

            diagnostic  aids  or  explanatory  propositions….So  far  as

            intelligence per  se is  concerned…what  is  outstanding

          about psychopathy is not its arithmetic proportions but is

          its  peculiar  variety  and  design…The  intelligence  of  the

            psychopath  can  be  described  only  adjectivally  and  in

          terms of the [psychopath’s] whole personality. Perfectly

          adapted  to  his  needs  in  the  same  way  as  protective

          coloring  is  suited  to  the  preservation  of  the  life  of  an          animal,  all  those  psychological  functions  (thinking,

            understanding, imagining, remembering, etc.) which are

          held  to  be  components  of  “intelligence”  have  in  the

            psychopath superimposed on them an aura of shrewdness

          and  secretive  cunning,  of  calculating  canniness.  These

          elements not only serve psychopathic ends but effectively

          distort and divert all known measuring instruments, the

          rigid designs of which prevent their divinatory use with

          such  individuals…A  further  striking  feature  of  the

            intelligence  of  the  psychopath,  and  one  which  appears

          only after long time acquaintance with such individuals, is

            concerned  with  the  amazing  excess-cargo  of

            uncoordinated  and  useless  information  they  possess.

            Frequently one is misled by their typically encyclopaedic

          range into considering them persons of high intellect, even

          of culture. Penetration with time, however, discloses that,

          like the veneer of mahogany applied to inferior wood, this

          mass of “knowledge” is superficial and undigested; that it

          is  free-floating,  lacking  the  requisite  elements  of

          cohesiveness and relativity.



      16.3 The reverence that people have for psychopaths



       The reverence that people have for these empty vessels has

nothing to do with the all but non-existent content of what they’re saying; it

has  instead  to  do  with  their  charisma  and  braggadocio.  They  exude  an

unabashed self-confidence and authoritativeness. When discussing U.S. history,

a non-psychopathic expert on U.S. history is likely to appear self- confident,

because he really is self-confident. And when he’s talking about non-standard

analysis (supposing that he isn’t also a mathematician), he’s likely to lack self-

confidence and, therefore, to appear to lack it.



        A psychopath, on the other hand, always exudes self-confidence.He may be an expert on what he’s talking about, or may know nothing about it

at all. In each case, he will exude the same level of confidence. There will be no

changes in mannerisms, no vocal modulations, no trace of anxiety that would

indicate self-doubt or compensatory hubris. Regardless how confident he ought

to be, he will appear utterly self-assured. He is likely to use histrionics to draw

attention away from what he’s actually saying. In general, psychopaths are

confidence-men (con-men). They con by exuding confidence.



                There are two doctrines to which all but one or two of the many

psychopathic  professors  I’ve  known  were  drawn:  Marxism  and  Cultural

Relativism.  What these doctrines have in common is that they deny there is

such a thing as truth. Marxism: “The truth is a lie told by the ruling class; so

there  is  no  truth.”  Cultural  Relativism:  “Truth  is  whatever  a  given  culture

believes it to be; so there is no truth.”



         Setting aside the fact that any doctrine to the effect that there is

no truth is self-defeating, any such doctrine is maximally easy to absorb, since,

if that doctrine is right, there is ipso facto nothing to absorb. And to the extent

that a given discipline accepts such a doctrine, its methods are ipso facto purely

exhortatory; for, if there is no truth, then the traditional way of finding the

truth---namely,  objectively  considering  the  relevant  evidence  and  making

inferences from that evidence that are licensed by rules of inference whose

truth-conduciveness has been established---belongs in the ash-can.



      16.4 Psychopaths have minds, but not selves: the psychopath’s non-

Frankfurtian psychological architecture



                  In any case, psychopaths are not at all like Hannibal Lecter.

Psychopaths  are  frauds.  They  can’t  accomplish  anything  without  cheating.

Hannibal Lecter is evil. But he isn’t a fraud; he isn’t a cheat; his intellectual

accomplishments are legitimate.          Also, Hannibal Lecter was a person, in Frankfurt’s sense of the

word.    That  by  itself  means  that  he’s  not  a  psychopath.  Psychopaths  are

pseudo-people. Psychopaths have minds, but they don’t have selves. They have

narratives that replace the selves they lack. This is why (intellectually minded)

psychopaths  are  drawn  towards  nihilism  (nothing  means  anything)  and

relativism  (there’s  no  right  or  wrong;  no  person’s  viewpoint  is  any  more

accurate than anyone else’s; no culture’s values are any more reasonable than

any other culture’s).  As  far  as  a  psychopath  can  tell, there  is no  difference

between truth and propaganda. So, after a fashion, he really does believe that

all opinions are equally correct. An opinion is a view as to what the truth is. So,

by virtue of having an opinion, one is assuming that there is such a thing as

truth. That assumption is false, according to the psychopath: since all opinions

100% wrong, they are therefore equally wrong.



        The word “value” means nothing to the psychopath. He can

acquire a rudimentary understanding of how to use value-related words. He

can figure out that theft is “bad” and that saving a drowning child is “good.” But

he doesn’t know what these terms mean. (Wittgenstein urged acceptance of

the  thesis  that  there  is  nothing  to  a  word’s  meaning  that  isn’t  known  by

knowing how that word is used. In Section 6.4, it will become clear why this is

relevant.) So he really does believe that all value-systems are equal: they are all,

he believes, 100% wrong and they are therefore equally wrong.



      16.4 Psychopaths are legion



          Psychologists say that psychopaths make up around 3%  of the

population. There are two reasons why I put little stock in that statistic. First,

it’s unclear what it means. Any degradation of psychological architecture due to

a loss of truthfulness with oneself is ipso facto psychopathy. One’s psychological

integrity can be intact in some respects but not in others. Also, psychological

integrity comes in degrees. So, unless we’re told in what respect a person’s

psychological integrity must be damaged, and to what degree, we’re not being

told anything in being told psychopaths make up 3% of the population.              Second,  the  diagnostic  techniques  employed  by  psychology

presuppose  that  there  are  very  rigid  and  simple  connections  between  a

person’s psychological condition and his outward behavior. This, I suspect, is a

by-product of psychology’s attempt over the last 50 years to scientize itself.

That  attempt  is  driven  by  a  combination  of  anti-mentalism  and  strict

empiricism. These doctrines jointly constitute a framework that recognizes no

diagnostic  methods  that  don’t  link  psychological  conditions  with  forms  of

behavior so narrowly defined that instances of them are as unmistakable as the

color of litmus-strip.



              It follows that such tests are of limited probative value, given

that different conditions can assume the same outward form and that a given

condition can assume different outward forms. Also, such tests being what they

are,  it  is  easy  for  someone  to  figure  out  how  must  act,  when  being

administered such a test, if the resulting diagnosis is to be exactly what he

wants it to be. Being the con-artists that they are, psychopaths are inevitably

quick to acquire precisely this knowledge.



              In  any  case,  unlike  the  psychologists  who  came  up  with  the

previously-mentioned  statistic,  Cleckley  succeeds  in  giving  us  some

understanding of the extent to which psychopathy is a part of mankind’s lot:



                            It becomes difficult to imagine how much

          of the sham and hollowness which cynical commentators

          have  immemorially  pointed  out  in  life  may  come  from

          contact in serious issues with persons affected in some

          degree  by  the  disorder  [namely  psychopathy]  we  are

          trying to describe. The fake poet who really feels little; the

          painter who, despite his loftiness, had his eye chiefly on

          the  lucrative  fad  of  his  day;  the  fashionable  clergyman

          who, despite his burning eloquence or his lively castigation

          of the devil, is primarily concerned with his advancement;

          the flirt who can readily awaken love but cannot feel love

          or  recognize  its  absence;  parents  who,  despite  smooth            convictions  that  they  have  only  the  child’s  welfare  at

          heart, actually reject him except as it suits their own petty

          or selfish aims: all these types, so familiar in literature and

          in anybody’s experience, may be as they are because of a

          slight affliction with the personality disorder now under

            discussion.  I  believe  probable  that  many  persons

            outwardly  imposing  yet  actually  of  insignificant  import

          really are so affected.



      17.0 Sociopathy vs. Psychopathy



    A psychopath: somebody with no conscience. 



    A sociopath: somebody who has a very corrupt conscience or no

conscience  but  who,  during  his  formative  years, did have  a  non-corrupt

conscience and whose psychological architecture, developing as it did during

those years, is that of a non-psychopathic person.  



            The mechanisms of self-censure and self-correction that distinguish

the non-psychopath from the psychopath are present in the sociopath. And, in

most cases of sociopathy, those mechanisms are laid down and developed

before  sociopathization  occurs;  so  they’re  fairly  hardy.  Thus,  at  least  in  its

structural respects, the sociopath’s psychological integration is, at least during

the early phases of sociopathy, more similar to the non-psychopath’s than to

the psychopath’s.



     To be sure, the sociopath’s mind lacks the values that give integrity

to  a  non-psychopath’s  mind.  (I’m  referring  to  psychological,  not  moral,

integrity.) But since those values were once present in the sociopath, and since

his psychological architecture was formed when he still had values and wasn’t

yet a sociopath, that architecture is basically that of a non-psychopath.              That said, it is entirely by virtue of the force of inertia that the

sociopath’s  psychological  architecture  doesn’t  collapse.  The  sociopath’s

psychological integrity, which is what distinguishes him from the psychopath, is,

at this point, purely vestigial. Consequently, there is little keeping the sociopath

from becoming a psychopath.



      A psychopath is a pseudo-person. He constructs a narrative that acts

as a surrogate for the life-history that, had he actually had a self, he would have

had. To be sure, the psychopath has experiences, just like everyone else, and he

remembers them as well the next person. But he doesn’t have a life’s story.

Much of what a normal person refers to as his “life-experience” or his “story”

consists, not of his experiences, but of his reactions to his experiences: the

distress they caused him; the self-criticism they prompted him; the subsequent

changing  of  his  values  and  his  objectives;  the  elation  he    felt  at  having

triumphed over the deficiencies in himself that led to his previous failures.

These meta-experiences that unify a person’s various first-order experiences

into a cohesive structure. That structure is his “life’s story.” The psychopath

experiences doesn’t have such meta-experiences. His life is a mere sequence of

experience. The psychopath values nothing. Therefore, he doesn’t analyze his

experiences, unless there is some immediate practical reason to do so. He

doesn’t experience the internal struggles make us who we are (“who am I?,” “

what do I really want?,” “am I going to law school because I really want to be a

lawyer, or because that’s the ‘right’ thing to do?”, etc.). The psychopath is never

conflicted (except in some pragmatic sense---he may not know whether or not

he has to take a right turn if he’s to make it to work on time). He never wonders

whether he’s being true to himself. For a person who values nothing, and

therefore doesn’t value truth, doesn’t care whether he’s being true himself; he

doesn’t even know what it is to be true to oneself. Nor does the psychopath

come into conflict with other people. Of course, other people inevitably stand

in his way.  But the psychopath merely sees people as threats or nuisances; he

is no more in conflict with them than you are in conflict with a bobcat that

you’re defending yourself against. The bobcat is a threat to your survival. But it

isn’t by representing an indictment of your psychological integration, or the

values constitutive thereof, that it’s a threat to you. So your altercation with the

bobcat, though a serious and potentially life-altering or life-terminating matter,isn’t a drama. There’s nothing distinctively human about it. There’s drama only

where there is a clash of values, and there’s a life story only where there’s

drama----only,  that  is  to  say,  where  one  has  value-driven  experiences  in

response  to  one’s  experiences  and  where,  consequently,  one’s  current

experiences, thoughts, and decisions are informed, not merely by what has

happened to one, but the value-driven changes that one made to oneself in

response to those experiences. Since the psychopath has no values, his current

experiences, etc. are not thus informed; he lives in the moment, in a pseudo-

Zen manner. He has no life’s story. There is no “him”, really. There is a mind; but

the meta-mental superstructure that is a person’s self is quite absent. 



        The psychopath has to seem like an actual person. Otherwise, he’ll

be seen for the freak that he is and won’t be able to gain people’s trust or,

therefore, to predate upon them. So, because he has to fit in and therefore

seem human, he has to create a life’s story; he has to manufacture a narrative.

He is likely to have different narratives, since a narrative that works with one

person may not work with another. Those narratives are not based on a first-

hand understanding of what personhood really is. They are based on what, in

the psychopath’s judgment, is most likely to work. What sort of narrative he

concocts depends on who he’s dealing with and what he wants. Inevitably, his

narratives are not completely false; in fact, they may be largely accurate. But

that  isn’t  because  he  values  the  truth;  it’s  because  a pure lie  is  much  less

effective than one that has a component of truth; and it’s also because, if his

narratives were pure lies, he would have a hard time keeping them straight and

would seen be seen for what he is.



       The psychopath’s self is just a script, albeit one that, like many

scripts,  isn’t pure fiction. The psychopath isn’t speaking from the heart; he’s

reading from a teleprompter. Since he doesn’t exist, except in the same sense

as Elmer Fudd, there is nothing in himself to which he wishes to be true and

thus  no  off-message  point  that  he wants  to  make.  So  the  psychopath  is

unusually likely to say just what will make the boss promote him, just what will

make Sally fall in love with him, just what will make Bill hand over his life’s

savings to him. He’s unusually likely to be seen as “a great guy.”      One corollary of the fact that the psychopath has no self deserves

special mention. When you refer to a non-psychopath by his name---when you

refer to him as "Smith", or whatnot----the way in which you are using that

expression is different from the way in which you are using that expression

when  referring  to  a  pet  parakeet  of  the  same  name.  The  parakeet  is  an

organism that has a mind but not a self. Since personal names (e.g. "Smith"), as

opposed to impersonal names (e.g. "Paris"), are, by virtue of their semantics, to

be  given  only  to  beings  that  have  selves,  parakeets  cannot  have  personal

names, and attempts to give them such names, when not ironic, embody some

seriously  misguided  views  about  parakeet-psychology  (or  about  semantics).

When we refer to a psychopath by his legal name, we are using that expression

in the same, improper way in which we would use it to refer to a parakeet.





            17.1 Rationalization: The gateway to sociopathy



           Smith is a talented novelist, and he considers novel writing to be

an extremely valuable activity and he also rightly considers it to be the most

valuable activity of which he personally is capable. For a while, Smith tries to

write novels and to indulge his craving for pot and junk food. But he soon finds

that his pot-induced lethargy put him in an either/or situation. Either smoke

pot or write novels. But don’t do both. It isn’t possible.



            Being lazy and self-indulgent, Smith chooses to smoke pot and eat

junk foot. At first, he feels terrible guilt as a result. But his guilt, though intense,

isn’t intense enough to overpower the forces, or lack thereof, within him that

are responsible for his ditching his career as a novelist in favor of a non-career

as  a  binge-eating  junky.  Still,  the  ever  present,  gnawing  feeling  of  guilt  is

souring his otherwise unalloyedly blissful existence.



        He thus has a choice. Either:                  (1) Start writing novels and stop smoking pot/eating

        junk food;



      or:



                  (2) Eliminate the part of conscience that makes him

        feel guilty for taking the easy path       (smoking pot, etc.), as

          opposed to the difficult, but right, path (writing novels).



        Taking path (2) involves Smith’s telling himself that, in fact, he’s

doing  the  right  thing,  as  opposed  to  the  easy  thing.  It  involves  Smith’s

reconstituting his values so as to validate the weakness-driven choice that he

has  made.  Taking  path  (2)  involves  Smith’s rationalizing.  It  involves  his

constructing a spurious narrative relative to which the wrong choice is the right

one. Such a narrative might be along the following lines:



                (SR)  I  like  writing  novels,  and  I’m  good  at  it.  But  it's

      morally  wrong  to  write  novels,  since  people's  use  novels  to

        escape  from  ugly  truths  instead  of  dealing  with  them.  The

        apparent  counterexamples  to  this  are  actually  the  best

        illustrations of it. X, let us suppose, is a latter day Steinbeck. He

        writes about the insidious machinations of the wealthy and their

        devastating effects on the poor. His novels are masterpieces. But

      they do anything in the way of helping bring about the needed

        social changes? No. They do the opposite, in fact. X’s novels turn

      the sufferings of society’s victims into a source of amusement.

      Token concern for their plight becomes all the rage; it becomes

      chic  to  wear  T-shirts  emblazoned  with  anti-establishment

        slogans. The corporation that manufactures those T-shirts uses

        over-seas sweatshop-labor. It dumps toxic waste into reservoirs.

      Its board members vivisect poor people for fund. So it is itself a

      pillar  of  the  iniquitous  social  order  that  it  was X’s  novels

        describe.       So, even though X’s heart was in the right place, he

      his hands are covered in blood.  But his hands would be clean if

      he'd smoked pot, instead of writing his novels. Thus, it is my

      ethical duty not to write novels and to smoke pot all the time. 



          Even if SR is correct, Smith is still living a lie and, as a result, he is,

or will in due course become, a hollow shell. For, even if SR is correct, it isn’t

Smith’s acceptance of SR that leads him to take Path (2): it is his laziness that

does so. In deferring to his laziness, Smith is alienating himself from his core

values. And, in doing this, Smith is alienating himself from himself and from the

sources of energy on which, when attempting to perform any sort of action, he

must  draw.  For,  as  we’ve  established,  the  self is a  set  of  values---or,  more

precisely, an agency that oversees and manages an otherwise desultory stream

of mental activity, giving it cohesiveness and thereby endowing that mind-

constituting, but self-less stream with an enduring identity; and, as we’ve also

established, it is through its imposition of values on this empty, identity-less

stream of mentation that this supervisory agency accomplishes these feats. So,

in  so  far  as  his  conduct  is  rationalization-driven,  it  isn’t  self-driven,  a

consequence being that, so far as Smith’s rationalizations play an increasing

role in Smith’s life-path, Smith is regressing into a condition of not having a self-

--of being an empty shell, who, lacking in any real identity, has to fall back on

the pseudo-identities of which his rationalizations and false narratives avail

him. 





        17.1.1  Rationalization: The gateway to sociopathy (continued)




        Rationalizations  tend  to  involve  putting  sincerely  held  beliefs  to

insincere use. Individual facts are not denied; but they are taken out of context,

and the patterns they form are conveniently overlooked. Part of what makes it

relatively easy to overlook such patterns is that, whereas one literally sees (or

otherwise sense-perceives) raw data, patterns aren’t in any literally sense seen.To "see" a pattern is to become aware of a commonality holding among many

different events, between any two of which there is a gap in time and which,

taken collectively, may occupy a long period of time. Thus, seeing a pattern

involves  making  correct  judgments  on  the  basis  of  information  stored  in

memories.



         It follows that patterns are easily overlooked. Memories are easily

corrupted, especially when they relate to emotionally touchy subject-matter.

Also, the making of any judgment of any sophistication involves acceptance of

an intricate network of inference rules and general principles. Given a person

who  is  incapable  of  rigorous  thought  and  is  just  slightly  biased,  or  who is

capable of rigorous thought but is deeply biased, it doesn’t take much to make

that person doubt the accuracy of the aforementioned constellation of beliefs.

A  rigorous  thinker  is ipso  facto likely  to  have  the  wherewithal  to  produce

arguments that, although hollow and sophistical, initially appear to meet his

own high standards of proof and that consequently suffice to give him reason

to doubt the accuracy of a once cherished belief. An unrigorous thinker ipso

facto needs little argumentative inducement to part with a once cherished

belief  and  therefore  probably  does  have  the  modicum  of  argumentative

 
sophistication needed to give himself that inducement.   



      Actually, I doubt that any real acumen is needed to rationalize; and I

suspect  that,  although  intelligent  people  are  probably  better  rationalizers

ceteris  paribus than  unintelligent  people,  the  degree  to  which  the  former

surpass the latter as rationalizers  isn’t even close to being commensurate to

the degree to which the former surpass the latter as thinkers. These points are

discussed and defended in the next section; so I’ll hold off on them for now.



       The rationalizer does not do what he thinks is right. Moreover, it’s

not through simple ignorance that he does the wrong thing. He’s not in the

same category as somebody who mistakenly thinks that smoking is healthy and

therefore smokes. He’s in the same category as a smoker who knows that

smoking  is  unhealthy  and  tries  to  stave  off  the  subsequent  wrath  of  hisconscience by concocting some narrative relative to which his hands are clean

(e.g., “It’s not as though I’m an axe-murderer---in the big scheme of things,

smoking is a harmless vice”,,” “we all die anyway---why not do what I enjoy

while I’m still alive?”,,” etc.).



        17.1.2  Rationalizing easier than not rationalizing




      Rationalizers see the world as they want it to be, not as it is.

Thinkers see the world as it is not as they want to be. So people have an

incentive both to rationalize and to not think.



            Also,  rationalizing  is  the  path  of  least  resistance.  Working  for

what you want is hard; pretending that you have it is easy. This obviously

gives people another incentive both to rationalize and to not think.



      Also, thinking does, whereas rationalization does not, involve

recognizing  that  one  is  fallible  and,  therefore,  that  the  world  was  not

designed to validate one's opinions. Thinking involves subordinating one's

mental  activities  to  objective  norms.  This  involves  evaluating  one's  own

thoughts  and,  oftentimes,  admitting  that  they're  wrong.  Rationalization

involves not subordinating  one's  thoughts  to  objective  norms  and not

admitting that one is wrong. So the rationalizer's ego is spared the hard

knocks that the thinker's ego has to endure.



              Rationalization is a manifestation of our instinct to flee from

danger. Through physical flight, we flee from an external threat; through

rationalization, we flee from an internal threat. Thus, a person's tendency to

rationalize has deep instinctual roots. For this reason, rationalizing doesn't

involve  exercising  one's  agency.  In  fact,  it  involves  letting  sub-agential,

instinctual forces triumph over one's agency.          So far as one's agency is involved in the construction of a

rationalization, it is nothing more than the puppet of sub-agential instincts,

its sole function being to make instinct-driven, lapses in self-discipline and

rationality appear to oneself to be expressions of rationality and self-control.



        Of course, everyone rationalizes, even the greatest of thinkers.

But to the extent that one’s mental activity mediates rationalization, that

activity is sub-agential; and to the extent that one’s mental activity mediates

genuine thought, it is agential.



      17.2. Why rationalization is inevitable and often healthy   




       Everybody rationalizes. Setting aside people who are exceedingly

damaged  (e.g.,  people  who  have  sustained  serious  brain-damage), it  is

psychologically impossible for a person not to rationalize.



       Moreover, it isn’t always bad to rationalize. In fact, it would be bad

t o never rationalize.  There  would  be  decision-paralysis  if  the  brain-centers

tasked with making decisions were flooded with too much truth. Also, one’s

conscious mind can only withstand a modicum of truth, lest one’s self-concept

sustain  irreparable  damage.  Speaking  from  an  evolutionary-biological

perspective, knowledge is a means to an end, the end being health. A complete

absence  of  conscious  knowledge  isn’t  health-conducive,  but  neither  is  an

excess  of  such  knowledge.  One  has  to  make  decisions  in  real-time.  One’s

“search-space” can’t be too large. Moreover, so many truths of which one is

aware, at some level or other, are so ugly that one cannot confront them all at

once and must do so in a piecemeal fashion.



             People  can’t  deal  with  everything  at  once.  So  they

compartmentalize. Sometimes bodies of information that are conscious (i.e.,

are readily accessible to consciousness, not being held down by the forces ofrepression) are compartmentalized. But this form of compartmentalization is

unstable. Two pieces of information both of which one is consciously aware,

tend to coalesce. There’s only so long one can consciously know both (a) that

one’s good buddy Smith is the only person who could have put arsenic in one’s

tea and (b) that one has been hospitalized repeatedly for arsenic poisoning

without also knowing (c) that Smith isn’t really one’s good buddy.     



                Also, there isn’t a sharp line between rationalization, on the

one hand, and the legitimate employment of rationality on the other. There are

three reasons for this:



                  (1)  The  construction  of  rationalizations  tends  to

        involve the legitimate employment of rationality.



                  (2)  As  previously  stated,  some  rationalizations  are

        true. And, in at least some cases, the difference between a

        belief  that  results  from  rationalization-based  belief  and  a

          ‘legitimate’ belief isn’t that the former is, whereas the latter

        is not, true; nor, necessarily, is it even that the former is,

          whereas the latter is not, arrived at in a spurious manner. In

        at least some cases, the difference lies in the use to which the

          belief---which may be true and legitimately arrived at—is put.

        And a given (legitimate and legitimately arrived at) belief can

        be put to different uses. It can be used to figure out how to

        help struggling nations become more prosperous and it can

        also be used to figure out how to impoverish those same

          nations.



                  (3)  A  given  belief  can  be  a  rationalization  in  one

        respect and a non-rationalization in others. One may have

        different reasons for arriving at a given belief, some of them

          embodying  wishful  thinking  and  others  embodying  sober

          consideration of the facts; and one may use a given belief as        the basis for a rationalization and for a legitimate pursuit of

        the truth. You believe that you mom is a good person partly

          because you want to believe that and partly because it’s true

        to a large extent, though not as large an extent as you’d like

        to think, and the evidence supports it, though not as much

        you’d like. And you can put your belief that your mother is a

        good person to different uses: you can use it as an excuse to

        look the other way when she does something that a good

        person would not do (rationalization) or you can use it to

        subject a claim made about her to sober examination (non-

          rationalization);  e.g.  on  the  basis  of  your  belief  that  your

          mother is a good person, you may accept the rationalization

        that her not allowing you to do athletics wasn’t intended to

          emasculate you or to vent her rage at your father (who was a

          professional  athlete  and  incessantly  carried  on  with  other

        women before dumping your mother); and on the basis of

        that  same  belief,  you  can  determine  that  so  and  so  is

          demented  or  deliberately  untruthful,  since  he  routinely

        makes  claims  about  your  mother  (e.g.  “she  eats  little

        children”) that plainly aren’t true.



      17.3 When rationalization is not healthy



       Given that everybody is, to some degree or other, a rationalizer,

what is the difference between those rationalizers who sociopathize and those

who don't? 



                There are two differences:



                  (1)  For  non-sociopaths,  rationalizations  are

          misfortunes, not deeds. For sociopaths, they're deeds, not

          misfortunes. Non-sociopaths don't seek out rationalizations;

          rationalizations are sought out in  them but  not by  them. In        the non-sociopath, rationalization happens sub-agentially. In

        the sociopath, rationalizations are deeds; he seeks them out,

        perfects  them,  and  accepts  them.  In  the  sociopath,

          rationalizations also occur sub-agentially. So the difference

        between the sociopath and the non-sociopath isn't that the

        faculties responsible for the construction of rationalizations

        have  been transferred; it's that, without losing any of their

        original  (sub-agential)  jurisdiction,  they spread:  they

          appropriate the subject's agency, leading in some cases to a

          complete reconstitution of the self. 



                  (2) Non-sociopaths care about the truth. Sociopaths

        do not. The non-sociopath's concern for the truth keeps his

          personality intact; it insulates it from his rationalizations. The

          sociopath's  self  has  no  such  insulation.  As  a  result,  it  is

          eventually taken over by its own rationalizations.



                  The  sociopath,  unlike  the  psychopath,  was  once  a

        person.  The  sociopath's  personality-architecture,  at  least

        during the initial stages of sociopathization, is far more like

        that  of  non-sociopathic  non-psychopathic  than  is  the

          personality architecture, what rudiments of it there happen

        to be, of the psychopath. When the soon-to-be sociopath

        stops caring about the truth, the rationalizations that swoop

        in occupy the same positions in that personality as the beliefs

        and values that they displaced. Thus, for a while at least, a

          sociopath's rationalizations operate within the same sort of

          structure as a non-sociopath's genuinely held beliefs. But that

          structure embodies values that the person  in question no

        longer has, and it eventually collapses.



              (2) is a corollary of (1). If a given person has no concern for the

truth,  there  is  nothing  preventing  him  from  actively  seeking  outrationalizations. 



      17.4 Sociopaths incessantly moralize



        Sociopaths are very moralizing. When speaking with them, one

cannot be oneself; one must behave in a hyper-correct fashion, lest one incur

their virulently ill-willed, pseudo-moral vituperations. Being with a sociopath is

like being in Oceania, the hyper-totalitarian society described in Orwell’s novel

1984. Just as, in Oceania, one is vaporized if one has any resistance to accepting

the government’s lies, so, when speaking with a sociopath, one is censured,

and thus vaporized, as it were, if one doesn’t operate within the sociopath’s

candy-coated, morality-drenched narrative.



              But the morality is fake;  it has nothing to do with the sociopath’s

beliefs as to how the world ought to be. This fake morality has four sources.  



              First, sociopaths don’t want people to see them for the vampires

that they are. They want people to think that they’re good. It isn't only for

strategic reasons that they want this. The sociopath has nothing but his image.

Whatever substance he one once had has been drained away and replaced

with a narrative. He's reading from a  teleprompter,  not  speaking  from  the

heart. There is no heart left. There is no self, in other words. So sociopaths

need the approval of others to feel that they have selves. And that's why they

insist on saying "correct" things, instead of human things. It's also why they're

drawn to "glamour." Show business is replete with sociopaths.



            Second, because sociopaths are so alienated from what is (or, when

it existed, was) human in themselves, they are forced to “phone it in”: they

have to read scripts; there is no longer a person, a self, within them for whom

they can speak; if their statements expressed their true inner lives, it would

consist of nothing but the tirades of an infant who hasn’t yet acquired a self

and whose emotional life is driven by infantile narcissism and, for that reason,sheer detestation of those who interfere with their infantile aspirations.



              Third, sociopaths resent their condition; they resent selling their

souls; they resent being made to give up their selves; and, for that reason,

they’re envious of those who have hung on to their selves. So they lash out at

those people---but, not wanting to be seen for the empty, tyrannical frauds

that they are, they do so under the banner of morality. Which, if the recipient

of their morality-coated rage is naïve, will hurt him and which, at the same

time, will help nobody, since its only real effect is to send the message that it’s

better to be a non-entity who wears a diamond-studded mask (underneath

which there is no self, only a disorganized mixture of self-hatred, compensatory

rage, and infantile (and also shame-driven) feelings of entitlement) than it is to

be the real person who is who he is.



                Fourth,  for  the  sociopath,  morality  is  a  weapon.  By  being

moralizing, sociopaths have what they’ve always wanted but never had: power.

Powerlessness makes one sociopathize; and once one has sociopathized, and

has thus overthrown one’s conscience, one has no compunctions about using

morality to belittle others.



           Earlier  we  mentioned  Orwell’s  book 1984. Speaking  from  a

psychodynamic viewpoint, 1984 is not fiction. It is an accurate description of

mass  sociopathization.  If  the  forces  at  work  within  the  real  world  were

embodied in our political institutions, the result would be the world that Orwell

describes. 1984 is not primarily about politics; it’s about people being driven by

fear into believing what they know to be lies and, as a result, ceasing to be

human. Fortunately, a system of government in which there are checks and

balances is capable of inhibiting, and sometimes altogether preventing, the

sociopathization of the political institutions on which people depend for their

welfare.



      17.5  Vampirism as a metaphor for sociopathy        Many movies and books are about vampires. Vampires are typically

represented as having certain properties.



                  (i) Vampires don’t appear in reflective surfaces, such

        as mirrors.



                  (ii) Vampires are creatures of darkness. Sunlight kills them.



                  (iii) A vampire cannot see his own face. (This follows

        from (i).)



                  (iv) Only others can see a vampire’s face (This follows

        from (iii).)



                  (v)  Vampires  live  in  opulence;  they  are  fabulously

        wealthy. Their spacious domiciles are richly appointed. They

        have all the material trappings of success. They are elegant

        and well-cultured. They dress like royalty.



                  (vi) Vampires can turn into bats.



                  (vii) One becomes a vampire by selling one’s soul.



                  (viii) A vampire must drink the blood of the living;

          otherwise he dies.



                  (ix)  Vampires  are  parasites  and  thus  have  only  a

          borrowed, second-class existence. (This follows from (viii).)              Taken jointly, (i)-(ix) suggest that vampires represents sociopaths.



       Interpretation of (i) and (ii): Vampires have no substance. That’s

why they cease to exist in the light of day, and it’s why they don’t appear in

mirrors.  Like  vampires,  sociopaths  have  no  substance.  That’s  why,  when

scrutinized---when looked at in the light of day, as it were, and not allowed to

take refuge in darkness--- the sociopath’s personality vanishes, his morality and

indeed his entire personality proving to be nothing more than fictions.



       Interpretation of (iii): The vampire’s face represents the sociopath’s

self-concept, and the vampire’s inability to see his own face represents the fact

that the sociopath has no endogenous self-concept. Lacking in any real self-

concept, sociopaths are empty; there is no life in them.



      Interpretation of (iv): The fact that only others can see the vampire’s

face corresponds to the fact that the sociopath’s self-concept is dependent on

the acknowledgement of others. (Sociopaths tend to spent a lot of time in front

looking at themselves in the mirror.) 



      Interpretation of (v):  The sociopath is empty; he tries to fill the void

with external tokens of the success. Also, since can’t distinguish the image from

the reality, and wealth creates the image of success, the sociopath equates

wealth with success.



      Interpretation of (vi): Bats are blind. So are sociopaths. Sociopaths

believe what they want to believe, not what is real; they are blind to the truth. 



      Interpretation of (vii):  One becomes a sociopath by selling out.



      Interpretation of (viii) and (ix):  The sociopath’s existence is a wakingdeath,  from  which  he  has  no  respite  except  when  he’s  drinking  up  the

adulation of others, a corollary being that, without the adulation, the sociopath

suffers the same fate as the blood-deprived vampire.  



      17.6  What kind of person is the sociopath?



  I will try to answer this question by answering a more specific one,

namely: what kind of a person is a sociopathic professor likely to be. Why

take this approach? First, since I work on a daily basis with many sociopathic

professors, and since, being a professor myself, I am inevitably made privy

to  their  machinations,  I  am  able  to  speak  authoritatively  about  them.

Second, because my sociopathic colleagues are strikingly similar to the many

sociopathic non-professors with whom I acquainted, even though the latter

come from all walks of life and are engaged all manner of professions,  I

have reason to suspect that those character-traits are inherent in sociopathy

itself and, therefore, that points similar to those that I will now proceed to

make  about  professors  hold,  in  some  form  or  other,  with  respect  to

sociopaths in general.



        Sociopaths are weaklings who can’t hack it and then lie, first to

others and then to themselves, in order to cover up their deficits. They are

people who aren't great but are so afflicted by infantile narcissism that they

cannot tolerate not being great. People of integrity who’d like to be an Einstein

or a Beethoven but find out that they’re not in that league don’t become

sociopaths; they become people who do what they can do and they take pains

to do it properly. The non-sociopath who wishes he were Einstein, but knows

that he isn’t, becomes a capable and hard-working civil engineer. The non-

sociopath who wishes he were Beethoven, but knows that he isn’t, becomes a

capable  and  hard-working  film-composer  or  music-teacher.    The  sociopath

chooses to be a fake Beethoven rather than a real sub-Beethoven. He chooses

to be John Cage, whose work is bogus but chic, rather than Paul Simon, whose

work, though sub-Beethovenian, is superb.      Sociopaths claim to be rebels who “think outside the box.” But

they’re  not  rebels;  in  fact,  they’re  arch-conformists.  And  they  don’t  think

outside the box; in fact, they don’t think at all. They embrace positions (e.g.

Marxism, Cultural Relativism, Post-Modernism) that, in some cases, were once

rebellious but, at least in the contexts in which the sociopath advocates them,

are  not  only not rebellious but shield their advocates from the scrutiny and

criticism to which their opponents are exposed.



            If a professor takes the post-modernist view that truth is culturally

relative, he’ll be applauded; if he takes the view that truth is not culturally

relative and that, in some cases, entire cultures have the wrong view, he’ll be

derided by his students and censured by his superiors. If a professor takes the

radically  implausible  post-modernist  view  that  the  psychological  differences

between men and women have no biological basis, he’ll be praised for his

open-mindedness; if he takes the opposite view, he’ll be branded a moron and

chauvinist  pig.    If  a  professor  takes  the  Marxist  view  that  so-called  moral

verities are but artifices by which the haves manipulate the have-nots, he’ll be

seen as a cutting edge thinker who is willing to question “dominant paradigm.”

If  a  professor  takes  the  non-Marxist  view  that  moral  truths  are  not  mere

chicanery  and  that  they  reflect  opinion-independent  facts  about  what

conduces to the health of individuals and groups thereof, he’ll be seen as a

pointy-headed, retrograde square. Also, if one takes the post-modernist view

that there is no truth and, more generally, that none of the benchmarks in

terms of which human beings evaluate themselves have any legitimacy, one

thereby  insulates  oneself  from  criticism;  for  any  criticism  of  his  views

presupposes that there is truth and is therefore spurious.     



              The chic Marxist law professor who, in the U.S. in the year 2010,

advocates the downfall of the U.S. government isn’t a rebel at all. He knows

that his words will have no effect at all, except to misinform his students and

stock the empty heads of faux-intellectuals with ready-made slogans that they

can use at cocktail parties, and he knows that the very government whose

downfall he advocates will ensure that not one hair on his head will be harmed.

Also,  unless  he’s  so  totally  sociopathized  that  he  himself  is  completelyconvinced  by  his  own  mythology,  he  knows  that  his  proposals,  if  by  some

miracle put into action, would obliterate the social structures on which life as

we know it depends. So he's a fool if he believes what he's saying and a fraud if

he  doesn't.    Finally,  given  the  almost  certainly  correct  supposition  that  he

knows, at least some degree, that what he's saying isn't true, he knows that

he’s misinforming his students, weakening their minds, and undermining their

autonomy.



            Similar points hold with respect to the hip media studies professor

who says that only suckers read books by dead, white males and that, were it

not for the machinations of advertising executives, we’d realize that listening to

hip-hop  was  better  for  our  intellects  than  reading  John  Stuart  Mill.  This

enlightened  hipster  is  saying  that  logic  and  hard-work  mean  nothing.  This

message may sound liberating. It is not. It’s a way of telling people to cripple

themselves.  (“Deprogram  yourself.  Whatever  part  of  you  is  responsible  for

what you naively thought of as thinking—rip it out!”) Thus, it’s a way of telling

them to cease to exist. For nothing remains of a person once he ceases to be

able to think for himself. 



       Like the Marxist law professor, the media studies professor hobbles

his students under the banner of emancipating them. The same is true of the

women’s studies professor who contends that the psychological differences

between men and women are entirely the result of social conditioning. This

contention entails that, because women have been brainwashed, they can’t

think for themselves and, therefore, that anything they have to say is to be

disregarded.  It  also  entails  that,  since  the  dawn  of  civilization,  men  have

succeeded  in  duping,  not  just  a  few  women,  but all of  them,  with  a  tiny

number of exceptions. This in its turn entails that women are, by nature, weak

and suggestible. It also entails that men seriously outclass women intellectually.

And this, in its turn, undermines the contention that, were it not for the lies

told by men, women would be just like men. For, were this thesis true, it

wouldn’t have been so easy for men to manipulate women.        In fact, that hypothesis, when considered in isolation of the

contexts in which it is advocated, has decidedly retrograde and anti-feminist

undercurrents. Men are brutes, who through charm and cunning, manipulate

women into being their willing servants. This sounds like the central conceit of a

Harlequin romance, and it hardly seems a viable basis of a political movement

whose  objective  is  to  emancipate  women  from  the  shackles  of  archaic,

misogynist attitudes and the social structures that perpetuate them.



              So one in saying that, were it not for misogynist propaganda,

women  would  be  psychologically  just  like  men,  one  is  saying,  if  only  by

implication, that



                  (i) men are naturally more cunning and treacherous

        and  women  and  men  and  women  therefore are

          psychologically different;



      and also that



                  (ii) women are by nature easily taken advantage of.



                “But you’re reasoning is quite off the mark,” it will be said. “First

of all, supposing that, indeed, men have been dominating women through the

ages, they may well have been doing so through sheer physical force. Second, it

could just be a historical accident that men happened to be the first gender to

use propaganda as a way of controlling the opposite gender; so the fact that,

thanks to their chicanery, men are “on top,” as it were, may reflect nothing

more than happenstance.”



        First of all, the contention being discussed is that it was not

through force, but through propaganda, and therefore through trickery, that

men came to dominate women. Second, given that men are the, for lack of a

better word, dominant gender in every society, many of which were isolatedfrom the others, shows that, if indeed it was through chicanery that men came

to dominate women, it wasn’t the product of historical happenstance and was

instead the result of some constitutional difference between men and women.



         Women have nothing to gain, and much to lose, by accepting the

contention that, but for male propaganda, women are psychologically just like

men. For a woman who accepts that view ipso facto believes that she has been

brainwashed and, therefore, that she can’t think for herself, and she ipso facto

thinks the same of other females. (“But women who realize that they’ve been

brainwashed,”  I’ve  heard  it  said,  “are ipso  facto free  of  the  effects  the

brainwashing to which they’ve been suggested.” This is deeply implausible. So

far  as  it’s  even  possible  to  completely  undo  the  effects  of  a  lifetime  of

brainwashing,  it  can’t  be  done  overnight:  realizing  that  one  has  been

brainwashed is only the first step in a very long journey whose final destination

is, at best, only a partial restoration of one’s faculties.) Thus, a women who

accepts this supposedly progressive thesis necessarily believes that men are

the only people who have not been brainwashed and therefore that, whatever

moral deficiencies men might have, they are the only people who are even

capable of seeing things as they are or, therefore, of providing sound guidance.

So such a woman undervalues herself, along with her fellow females, and she

over-values men. This double irony has a grim, as well as ironic, consequence,

namely, that a woman of the kind just described is an unusually easy mark for

male predators.



       It’s obvious that “so and so has been brainwashed” entails “so and

so’s  judgment  has  been  impaired.”  In  fact,  the  second  statement  is  a

tautologous consequence of the first, given that it makes no sense to say that

somebody has been has been brainwashed but that his powers of judgment

haven’t been negatively affected. So the professors who say that, for the last

several thousand years, women en masse have been brainwashed must surely

know that, in saying this, they’re saying that women are intellectually stunted.

Thus, such professors cannot possibly be motivated by a wish to help the plight

of  women  and  can  only  be  motivated  by  hatred  of  them  or  a  by

characteristically sociopathic willingness to base one’s career on a lie.              Each of the three pseudo-iconoclasts just described is driven by

shame: shame at not being able to produce a legitimate line of goods; shame

at being sterile and impotent. Having failed relative to the yardsticks by which it

was  their  original  intention  to  succeed,  they  embrace  an  ideology  that

invalidates those yardsticks. (Post-modernism: the standards in terms of which

we evaluate what we say and do have only as much validity as we want them

to have. Relative to one standard, modern medicine is superior to Neanderthal

medicine; relative to a different, but equally valid standard, it’s the other way

around. Marxism: the truth is a fairy tale told by the haves to manipulate the

have nots. You didn’t really fail that test----that’s just what The Man wants you

to  believe.)  Given  how  brazenly  false  such  ideologies  are,  their  advocates

cannot accept them without ceasing to value truth and thus, given how much

of a psychologically healthy person’s identity depends for its existence on that

person’s valuing the truth, without eviscerating themselves.



              These fraudsters thus have multiple incentives to convince others

of the truth of the falsehood to which they’ve sacrificed their identities.



                  First,  misery  loves  company:  they  want  others  to  make  the

same sacrifices they’ve made so that others will suffer with them.



      Second, they desperately need others to tell them they’re not

frauds. This is because the doctrines they espouse are so at variance with such

obvious  facts  that,  deep  down,  they  don’t  really  accept  those  doctrines,

notwithstanding the psychosurgery they’ve performed on themselves.



         Third, they need others to adulate them. The reason for this is

different from the reason for which they need others to tell them that they’re

not frauds. People who value the truth can validate themselves. An author who

values the truth can take pride in a book he's written that nobody ever reads

but that he knows to be good. As somebody who values truth, he knows that

any  praise  that  he were  to receive for his book would have no more value

(except, of course, of a purely instrumental kind) than the book itself. So, sincehe already knows his book to have value, any praise that he might receive for it

would (except from a practical point of view) be redundant.



         But to somebody who doesn’t value the truth, true statements are

no more valuable than false one. A corollary is that, as far as such a person is

concerned, it’s irrelevant whether the praise they receive is well founded. Well-

founded praise is truthful praise. Since sociopaths have to believe their own

spurious narratives, they identify the appearance of truth with truth itself. A

writer whose works aren't read appears to be a failure. So, from the sociopath's

viewpoint, he is a failure. A writer whose works are best-sellers appears to be a

success. So, from the sociopath's viewpoint, he is a success. Since the image is

the reality, a book is only as good as it is praised, and a person is as good as he

is adored.



         Though he doesn’t want be adulated, the non-sociopathic literary

genius  wants  to  be recognized. Adulation  is  different  from recognition.

Recognition=being  praise  because  of  what  one  has  done. Adulation=being

praised, not because of what one has done, but because of who one is. For

Smith to be adulated is for Smith to be praised for being Smith. For Smith to be

recognized is for Smith to be praised for composing a great symphony.



        People of conscience want see justice done, and they thus want

credit to be given where credit is due. To be sure, there is an element of sheer

egoism in a writer’s desire for recognition. In fact, his egoism is almost certainly

likely to be much more of a fact than his sense of justice. But the way in which

egoism is expressed in a person of conscience is very different from the way it

is a expressed in a sociopath. The writer’s egoism is expressed in his wanting to

be praised and in his not caring very much whether other, equally deserving

writers are praised; his sense of justice is expressed in his wanting to be praised

because he deserves it. Many writers, thinkers, and artists of genius are praised

for works of theirs that they rightly regard as among their worst. For example,

Rachmaninov, who was a musical genius of staggering proportions, was best

known for his prelude in C# minor, which, as he knew, was one of his worstworks. For financial reasons, he had to perform it. But, whenever he did so, he

went into a depression. Although I have read extremely little good literature

and have no eye for graphic art, I am quite certain that Rachmaninov’s situation

is by no means unusual. The reason that Rachmaninov found it so dispiriting

that he was praised for this work of his is that he wanted to be praised for the

right reasons: he wanted the commendations that he received to be ones that

he earned; if only within the confines of his attitude towards people’s feelings

towards his work, he wanted justice.



           Rachmaninov’s attitude towards the misguided adulation that he

was  received  was  quintessentially non-sociopathic.  The  sociopathic  wants

praise for its own sake. He doesn’t care whether he’s earned it or not. In fact,

he doesn’t really have a concept of earning anything. For if one distinguishes

between those who have things because they earn them, and those who just

have them, one must distinguish between image and reality; and the essence

of sociopathy is a refusal, driven by a need to believe one’s own lies, to make

the latter distinction



                “According to you,”, it is likely to be said, “authors who know

that they’re work is good don’t want praise. But that isn’t true. And surely that

discredits much, if not all, of what you’ve just said.”



                The first part of this point is quite right: many an author who

values the truth wants adulation despite knowing that what he’s written is

good. But this doesn’t undermine anything of I’ve said. This is because, when

such an author wants praise, it is for one of three reasons:



                  (i)  Although he knows at some level that what he’s

          written is good, some part of him skeptical; and, in being

          praised, his insecurities are finally being put to rest. 



                  (ii)  in  being  praised,  this  previously  unnoticed          literary giant is finally being given evidence that there is at

          least some justice in the world;



      or



                  (iii)  such  praise  brings  with  it  all  manner  of

          monetary  and  practical  benefits  thanks  to  which  one

          doesn’t have to waste time groveling before slimy editors

          and  working  at  a  menial  job  and  thanks  to  which  one

          finally has access to some of the finer things in life.




      But this only confirms our point that, if a person genuinely is

convinced that what he’s written is good, he doesn’t want adulation per se:

what he wants are the benefits that adulation brings with it.



        Some are likely to reject (i). “If an author knows that what he’s

written is good,” it will be said, “he ipso facto cannot possibly be at all insecure

about  its  merits.”    This  criticism  falsely  assumes  that  people  cannot  have

mutually opposed beliefs. The statement “Smith believes that 1+1=2 and Smith

does not believe that 1+1=2” is incoherent. But the statement “Smith believes

that 1+1=2 and Smith believes that 1+1≠2” is perfectly coherent. In fact, the

history of ideas is replete with cases of people having incompatible beliefs. In

particular, many a great artist (e.g. Brahms) was rightly convinced, in a genuine

and non-defense way, of the excellence of his work while being tormented by

terrible insecurities about it.  People are not cognitively unified. And an author

who knows that his work is great can, at some level, believe that his work is

bad and, therefore, will find praise for his to work to be a source of comfort.



      17.7  Fame in connection with sociopathy



                Fame is a great sociopathizer. People who, within narrow limits,had merit are, for some random reason, propelled to the heights of stardom, at

which point they are grossly overvalued by the public and start to feel like

frauds. They then have a choice:



                  (i)  They can believe the lie that every one is telling

        them  (you're  great, you're  a  real  thinker,  not  just  some

          comedian whose sense of humor was so anodyne that some

        board of directors knew it risked nothing by making you a

          talk-show host);



      or:



                  (ii) They can admit that they're not great and then

        either renounce the benefits of fame or consciously live a lie.



                    One can understand why, confronted with this choice, many

people go with (i).



      18.0 The non-sociopathic/non-psychopathic predator



             A person who doesn’t rationalize---who doesn’t replace his true

self with a fake narrative---is not a sociopath. Non-sociopaths are sometimes

evil. Some of them, in fact, are supremely evil. In fact, if a list were made of the

10,000 most evil people of all time, not a single sociopath would appear on it.

(Nor, for very different reasons, would a single psychopath be on that list.) This

is because sociopaths want to believe that they’re not as empty as they really

are. And, despite their willingness to prefer fiction over truth, they’d make it

very  hard  for  themselves  to  believe  that  they  had  merit i f they  acted  as

treacherously as a Stalin or a Mao. 



       “Sociopath” doesn’t mean “evil person.” “Sociopath” means “fakeperson  with  a  corrupt  conscience.”  (“Psychopath”  means  “non-person  who

never had a conscience and who, for that reason never had a self, has always

lived through narratives fabricated ad hoc.”) Sociopaths are always evil. But evil

people are not always sociopaths. And evil non-sociopaths are more evil than

sociopaths, since, unlike sociopaths, the former aren't struggling to convince

themselves that they're good and thus have no compunctions about going all

out, as it were, when it comes to evil-doing.



      Sociopaths aren't human. They've stopped being human. Evil non-

psychopathic,  non-sociopaths  are  thoroughly  human.  But,  whereas  my

objective  is  to  write  treatises  and  yours,  let  us  suppose,  is  to  become  a

pediatrician, their objectives are to do harm.



      18.1 The non-sociopathic/non-psychopathic predator (continued)



              “How is it possible," it will be asked, "for that to be the objective of

somebody who isn’t deranged in some way?”



      The right question is: “How is it not possible?”



                We’re  the  victors  of  a  long,  brutal  evolutionary  struggle.  We

chose to fight it out. We didn’t opt out, like clams, by becoming so lame and

harmless  that  we  weren’t  worth  destroying;  nor  did  we  become  peaceful

herbivores whose entire lives are but preludes to being slaughtered and eaten.

So it’s no surprise that there are at least a few predators among our ranks.



                Would a tiger be better off if it renounced violence? No! Tigers

must be tigers; if they try to be sheep, they’ll die on the inside. Would a born

predator be better off if he were a Buddhist monk? No! Like the tiger, he’d die

on the inside; and, in all likelihood, his need to predate would come out in

circuitous  ways  (e.g.,  pettiness  towards  underlings,  thwarting  those  whoseaspirations are legitimate and whose work-product is authentic). By trying to be

peaceniks,  these  born  war-mongers  either  injure  themselves  or,  by  turning

structures on which the public depends for its welfare into outlets for their

undischarged aggression, do harm on a far greater scale than they would have

had they discharged their aggressions more directly.



      18.2 Criminalization as a way of avoiding sociopathization  



        Some people who become professional criminals (e.g., members of

organized crime) do so to avoid sociopathizing. In their view, working for “the

man”  involves  throwing  oneself  into  a  sausage-grinder:  one  must  tow  the

company line and, to use a phrase from Orwell’s Keep the Aspidistra Flying,

“lick the blacking off the boss’s boots.”  It involves becoming an empty suit: a

hollowed out shell who believes nothing except what higher ranking suits want

him to believe.



           Winston Smith, the main character in 1984, says how he hates

“goodness” and “purity.” What he means is that he hates the fake goodness

and the fake purity with which, as a citizen of Oceania, he is inundated.

What he means, in other words, is that he wants to be human, not “pure” or

“good”, which words, as they are used in his society and as they are used by

the  sociopath, don’t refer  to  purity  or  goodness,  but  to  their  plastic,

sociopathized analogues.



                Winston  was  a  good  and  honest  person  in  a  world  of

criminals. So why did he say that he hated purity and goodness? Ms. Marks’

insight  can  help  us  answer  this  question  and,  in  so  doing,  can  help  us

understand  the  mentality  of  non-sociopaths  who  operate  outside  “the

system.”



         Former Mafiosos who joined the Witness Protection Program

don’t rationalize. Sammy “the Bull” Gravano said that he was never, at anypoint, to any degree, a “Robin Hood” whose intentions were to do good; he

was, he said, somebody who wasn’t educated but who wanted power and was

willing to “scratch and kick and do whatever it [took]” to acquire it. Other

former  Mafiosos,  without  few  exceptions,  say  the  same  thing.  Jimmy  “the

Weasel” Frattiano said that he was a less than stellar human being who chose a

life of crime not because he had no other options, but because he liked having

power more than he liked being moral and, he implied, he would have been a

powerless nobody had he “gone legit.”



       People who admit to themselves that they’re evil are to that extent

non-sociopaths. The essence of sociopathy is a shame-driven rationalization of

one’s inability to live up to one’s own values. So far as one genuinely “owns”

one’s actions, which oftentimes involves admitting that one is a bad human

being, one is not a sociopath.



       In this context, it must be stressed, we are discussing people who,

criminalize in  order  to  stave  off sociopathization;  we  are  not  discussing

sociopaths who criminalize in order to hide their condition from themselves.

Many people become predators as a result of sociopathizing; and they falsely

tell themselves that, in going this route, they were simply doing what the laws

of the jungle required them to do. (“It’s a rough world. Nobody does you any

favors. Do whatever it takes. Just don’t get caught.”) Such people are lying by

pretending  to  be  brutally  honest:  their  pseudo-honest  admissions  to

themselves and others that they are predators are just ways of cloaking their

weakness-driven descent into sociopathy.



        But in some cases, as we’ve said, one criminalizes in order to hold

onto one’s identity, and, therefore, in order, in order to avoid sociopathizing.

Since  sociopaths  aren’t  who  they  are---since  they  half-believe  their  own

propaganda and thus half-believe they are good---there tend to be limits to

how evil they can be. But there are no limits to how evil a non-psychopathic,

non-sociopath can be. For example, Joseph Stalin---who, by any measure, was

one of the most wicked human beings ever---was not a sociopath. He was aserial killer who, having managed to acquire an enormous amount of power,

was able, unlike other predators, to predate on a large scale and without fear of

legal reprisal. He knew he was evil; and he rejoiced in it. He didn’t deceive

himself; he didn’t say that “it was for their own good” that he displaced entire

populations  and  condemned  millions  to  starvation.  He  did  it  because  he

wanted to do harm. To accomplish this, he obviously had to lie to others. But

he saw himself for what he was: a mass-murderer who also happened to be a

head of state.  So he wasn’t a sociopath.



        Although Stalin was a national leader, he saw himself for what he

was: a butcher, who, through chicanery and deceit, obtained for himself a

position from which he could, with impunity, be the serial killer the he was.

So  Stalin  was  not  a  sociopath;  for,  although  he  lied  to  others  (on  an

unprecedented  scale,  in  fact),  he  didn’t  lie  to  himself  (except  in  so  far  as

everyone does).



        Nor was Stalin a psychopath. A psychopath couldn’t have done

what Stalin did. Stalin’s ascent to power involved his being able to evaluate

himself  with  respect  to  yard-sticks  that  weren’t  concocted ex  post  facto to

rationalize  his  errors.  He  wouldn’t  have  learned  from  the  past  if,  when

evaluating  his  mistakes  in  terms  of  yardsticks  that  were independent of his

desires, he weren’t able to see the folly of his ways.



         Also, psychopaths are extremely impulsive. They can contain this

side of themselves for a while; but sooner or later it comes out. And when it

does, their careers are over. Their impulsiveness  is  a  consequence  of  their

having only a limited and contextual grasp of the truth. Since, as previously

stated, they don’t value truth for its own sake, they value it only when they

know that it will serve them well. And since, as we observed, it’s impossible to

prejudge when some now useless truth will become useful, the result is that

the psychopath has an excessively limited body of truths from which to draw

when  making  decisions.  Because  he  is  thus  blinkered,  his  impulses  aren’t

countered by a firm grasp of their consequences. Hence his impulsiveness.Stalin  was  not  impulsive.  He  was  calm  and  rational;  his  decisions,  though

maximally evil, were judicious and calculated.



                  Etymologically,  the  morpheme  “path”  (as  in  “sociopath”  and

“psychopath”) means “disease.” Sociopathy and psychopathy are both form of

pathology. That said, psychopathy is a much more acute form of pathology

than sociopathy. The sociopath's psychological architecture is in the process of

imploding;  he's  the  psychological  equivalent  of  somebody  whose  disease-

ridden internal organs are only semi-operational but have retained their basic

shapes.    By  contrast,  the  psychopath  is  like  the  somebody  who  never

developed those organs or who did develop only for them to be liquefied by a

case of Ebola.



                  Stalin didn’t fall into either of these categories. He knew what

he was; he knew what he wanted. What he was: a predator; a person of some

intelligence, but not as much intelligence as others; a person who, if he was to

predate  without  being  predated  upon,  had  to  engage  in  all  manner  of

chicanery. Since he had a self, he wasn’t a psychopath; and since he didn’t tell

himself that he was something that he was not, he was not a sociopath. He was

just evil.



      18.3 Donald Davison’s analysis of what intentions are



         According to Donald Davidson (1963), an intention is simply

one’s  strongest  desire.  More  precisely,  it  is  one’s  strongest  contextually

relevant desire. So, if I am in an ice-cream store and, for some reason, it’s

incumbent  on  me  to  eat  ice-cream,  my  subsequent intention to  eat

chocolate ice-cream is the strongest intention that I have that is an intention

to eat ice-cream at that time, in that place; it is stronger than my desire to

eat any of the other kinds of ice-cream that are available. At the same time,

of course, my desire to eat chocolate ice-cream is not my strongest desire

tout court. (In what follows, any references to one’s “strongest” desire are

always  abbreviated  references  to  one’s  strongest  contextually  relevantdesire.) So, according to Davidson, an intention is the desire that, because of

its strength, beats out the other desires with which it is in competition and

thus, unlike them, expresses itself in action.



        This reasonable-seeming analysis embodies several confusions.

A desire that is directly converted into overt behavior is a reaction, not an

action proper. Not all desire-driven motor activity is action. The ticks of a

Tourette's sufferer are behavioral manifestations of desires, but they are not

actions. A desire doesn't discharge itself as bona fide action unless, before

being translated into overt behavior, it is inhibited and scrutinized. 



         Even those desires that are expressed in action despite not

surviving such scrutiny are not cases of desires being directly converted into

action. They are cases of desires being scrutinized, then found to fall short,

but being allowed to discharge themselves anyway. The reason the tobacco-

addict feels ashamed is that, despite what his conscience tells him as he’s

considering his wish to smoke, he nonetheless lifts the initial inhibition that

he has on smoking. And even though, in respect of his overt behavior, he

may pounce on the cigarette the way a tiger pounces on red meat, the

addict’s behavior is that of somebody in whom the impulse to smoke is the

result of a decision: his impulse is initially quarantined, then scrutinized, and

only then,  despite  its  falling  short  of  the  relevant  valuative  benchmarks,

allowed to be discharged in action. The tiger’s desire, on the other hand, is

directly translated into action. Where selves are concerned, few so-called

impulsive behaviors, if any, involve a desire’s being directly translated into

action; they typically involve cases where there is an initial inhibition which,

despite his better judgment, the person in question chooses to lift.



        That said, the decision to lift the inhibition sometimes is a wise

one. The person in question wishes to appear like a violent, unpredictable

animal, since he knows that, given the circumstances, this is to his strategic

advantage; and he knows that, if he punches the person who just insulted

him,  that  is  precisely  how  he  will  appear.  Many  apparently  impetuousactions  are  carefully  considered.  We  must  remember  that  “carefully

considered” ≠ “slowly considered.” A carefully considered decision can be

made virtually instantaneously. This is partly because we think fast. But it’s

primarily because, given previous decisions that we spent a great deal of

time  making  and  that  we’ve  decided  to  comply  with,  it’s  immediately

obvious  how  to  behave,  when  contingencies  arise,  in  a  manner  that  is

consistent with those decisions.



                Our desires are fleeting. They constantly change. If Davidson

were right, we’d be buoyed hither and thither by our desires. Every time a

sufficiently strong desire came along, we’d “act out.” But, in so doing, we

wouldn’t  really  be  acting  at  all.  For  our  overt  behavior  wouldn’t  be  the

outcome of a decision.



          In fact, if Davidson’s theory were correct, we wouldn’t be

                                                                                  [23]
involved at all. Our impulses would use us to express themselves. The

overt behavior in which that desire was issued wouldn’t be an action at all,

at least not in the relevant sense. (It would be an action only in the sense in

which a tiger’s instinctual reactions are actions; it wouldn’t be an action in

the  sense  in  which  your  rational  and  carefully  considered  decision  to

become a physician is an action.)



         To be sure, if a desire is overwhelmingly strong, we will tend to

act on it. But, setting aside bona fide psychopaths, what tends going in such

cases isn’t that the desire directly results in action, and is instead that the

screening  process  leading  to  the  lifting  of  the  relevant  inhibition  is  fast-

                                                [24]
tracked and, possibly (but not necessarily), done shoddily.



          Contrary to what Davison holds, an action isn’t the direct

expression of any desire, be it one’s strongest desire or one’s weakest. An

action is the direct expression of a value-driven decision to lift an inhibition

on a desire. When deciding whether to lift that inhibition, one considershow doing so would affect one’s self-concept and one’s overall life-course.



        Thus, an intention, contrary to what Davidson holds, isn’t a

desire at all. It is a judgment. That judgment is intended to gratify some

desire; but the desire is not the intention. To sum up: if Davidson were right,

we’d  never  act;  we’d  only  react.  We’d  be  like  pinballs,  bouncing  from

bumper to bumper, each bumper being our strongest desire at the time.



         But that isn’t how we are. As Michael Bratman says, we make

plans. Once we make these plans, we tend to stick with them. Desires come

along that, if acted upon, would thwart those desires. We tend to inhibit

those desires. Sometimes the desire in question is too strong; so we gratify

it and thus either suspend or altogether junk the plan. But such a situation,

though  all  too  common,  represents  a  breakdown  in  the  structure  that

mediates between desires, on the one hand, and bona fide actions, on the

other.



       Also, although these plans are to a large extent intended to

gratify desires, and although that is what to a large extent they should be

intended to do, the desires in which they have roots are not typically raw,

instinctual ones. They are desires that incorporate one’s values and also

typically reflect previous decisions that one has made. I don’t much want to

read so and so’s latest book on semantics. But my intention to become a

semanticist requires that I do so. In reading so and so’s book, I am acting on

a desire that I have. But that desire is a consequence of a previous intention

that I formed, and that previous intention reflects my values and my self-

concept.  Those  values,  in  their  turn,  reflect---though  they  are  not  mere

                                            [25]
puppets of---raw instinctual desires. But those values are not desires.

Those  values  are  judgments  as  to  how  to  extend  the  hegemony  of  the

agency within myself that polices sub-agential mental activity on my part.

(Why “sub-agential” mental activity? Because that regulatory agency is my

self. Of course, after my self comes into existence, that regulatory agency

polices its own activities and thus polices agential activity.)      18.4 Donald Davison’s analysis of what intentions are (continued)



              Davidson identifies one’s intentions with one’s “strongest”

desires. But the term “one’s strongest desires” is ambiguous. There are two

kinds of strength that a desire can have, which I’ll refer to as “intrinsic

strength” and “organization-dependent strength.” An analogy will help us

move forward.



              Smith is, without any doubt, the best hand-to-hand fighter in

the world. He is the best boxer, the best wrestler, and so on. So there is

obviously some sense in which he is an extremely powerful human being.

But none of the organizations that officially manage these sports will let him

join them. So he wins no official competitions; he is given no awards; he has

no titles. He has fought with the best and won without so much as breaking

a sweat. And this fact is well known. But he’s still not part of “the club,” so

to speak. So as much of a threat as he might be on the street, his fighting-

prowess doesn’t mean anything: it doesn’t translate into money or acclaim

or influence.



       Jones is a reasonably good professional pugilist. He isn’t remotely

in the same league as Smith. (The two have fought. Jones didn’t even land a

punch.) But he is part of the club. So he does win awards for his fighting-

talents, relatively modest though they are; he does make money; he does

receive acclaim.



       Even though Smith is a much better boxer and all around pugilist

than Jones, Jones is a more powerful figure within the boxing world than

Smith. In fact, Smith is powerless within that world, even though he is the

best boxer alive.



       The mind is much like the sort of organization of which Jones is a

member. It’s a club; and if a desire isn’t a member of it, it doesn’t lead toaction. (It may become a member and then lead to action. And, as a non-

member, it can have effects. But those effects will be symptoms, not actions,

since the desire, not being a member of the club, cannot avail itself of the

reigns of agency.) A desire can be extremely strong; but if it isn’t part of the

club, its likelihood of being converted into action is small. (I say “small," as

opposed to “zero," because, if a desire is a strong enough, it is likely to

become a part of one’s psychological integration and, on that basis, to be

converted into action---just as, given his level of talent, Smith would be

likely, other things being equal, to be given a break and given membership in

the boxing-federation.) And if a desire is weak, but it’s deeply embedded in

“the club,"  it’s likely to be converted into action.



     So in saying that an intention is one’s strongest desire, Davidson

hasn’t said anything. If he’s saying that it is the strongest desire that is in

one’s mind, regardless of whether it is part of one’s psychological

organization, then Davidson is wrong; for such organization-external desires

don’t have access to the “reigns of agency” and are less likely than

organization-internal ones, even quite weak ones, to be expressed as

actions. If Davidson is talking about organization-internal desires, he runs

into the same problem. For, given two desires, the stronger one may be

more out of line with the plans, self-concept, and general psychological

organization, and may therefore be less likely than its weaker counterpart to

lead to action. If by one’s “strongest desire," Davidson is referring to that

desire of one’s that, given its position in one’s personality-architecture, is

most likely to lead to action, no matter how intrinsically weak it is, then his

position is false or empty. For Davidson is then saying either:



                  (a) That an intention is that desire that, despite very

          possibly having less strength than other desires, is so

        positioned that it will beat out those other desires;



      or:                  (b) The true measure of a desire’s strength is its

          likelihood of being expressed in action.



              If (a) is the right interpretation, Davidson is simply wrong to say

that one’s intention is one’s strongest desire. If (b) is the right

interpretation, Davidson is stating the empty truism that the desire that is

most likely to lead to action is the one that is most likely to lead to action.



        The most fundamental problem with Davidson’s analysis,

                                                    [26]
however, is the one that, following Bratman, we identified earlier.

Behaviors that directly result from desires are reactions, not actions. The

immediate cause of any bona fide action is, not that desire itself, but the

judgment-driven lifting of an inhibition on a desire. 



      18.5 Nietzsche’s ethical egoism: An exhortation to avoid

            [27]
sociopathy



        Nietzsche infamously argued for a doctrine known as ethical

egoism (EE). According to this doctrine, it is one’s sole ethical obligation to

promote one’s own welfare.



                One important desideratum that an ethical theory must satisfy

is to say how people should treat others. Obviously EE fails to satisfy this

desideratum. Since no viable ethical theory can fail to satisfy this

desideratum, EE fails as an ethical theory.



      But there are desiderata that an ethical theory ought to satisfy

and that, unlike every other ethical theory, EE does satisfy. First of all, an

ethical theory shouldn’t require people to diminish themselves. The most

pure way of being evil towards someone is to diminish them. An ethical

theory that diminishes those who follow it is therefore evil. And an ethicaltheory that is itself evil is ipso facto not a coherent one. Aside from EE, all

ethical theories do require people to diminish themselves: they require

people to do what others want and need them to do, not what they want

and need to do. EE doesn’t require people to diminish themselves. For EE’s

sole injunction is: Don’t diminish yourself! EE isn’t evil towards those who

follow it. Thus, there is a respect in which EE is coherent and in which all

other ethical theories are incoherent. (That said, there are respects in which

EE is incoherent and in which most, if not all, other ethical theories are

coherent.)



      There is another important desideratum that EE satisfies and that

all other ethical theories fail to satisfy. People are self-centered. People who

don’t allow themselves to do what they want to do are frustrated, unhealthy

people. (When I talk about “what people want to do," I mean what people

want to do in so far as what they want to do isn’t the result of cowardice or

complacency or otherwise self-diminishing factors. In other words, I am

talking about the wishes that people’s selves have, and I am therefore not

talking about the craven impulses that, although in people, are not of them--

-i.e., that, although in people’s minds, are not constitutive of their selves.)

One can obey EE faultlessly without jeopardizing one’s psychological health.

The same cannot be said of any other ethical theory. All other ethical

theories require one to put other people’s interests ahead of one’s own.

And, setting aside people who are already severely damaged, nobody can do

this unremittingly. A system of morality with which it is not psychologically

possible to be unremittingly compliant is ipso facto incoherent; for one has

no obligation to do what one cannot do (“ought implies can”).



      “But some people may genuinely want to be kind to others,” it

will be said. “EE forces people to be evil and thus to go against their own

natures. So, contrary to what you say, EE is evil towards its own followers.”

Not true. EE says: “Do what you want to do, so long as what you want to do

is authentic and doesn’t involve a diminution of who you are.” Not

everybody always wants to be a predator. In fact, few people are completely

predatory, and many people are nurturers by nature. Kindness and altruism,though often given exogenous reinforcement, usually have endogenous

roots. So EE does not demand that one hurt people whom one doesn’t want

to hurt. 



        Bearing all of this in mind, let AET be an arbitrary ethical theory

other than ethical egoism, and let Smith be an arbitrary person who

advocates AET. Given what we’ve said, Smith is damaged if he follows AET to

the letter; and supposing that Smith isn’t damaged, he’s a hypocrite, since

he tells people to follow AET, even though he himself does not do so. It’s

psychologically impossible for anyone who, like Smith, is not damaged, to be

unremitting in his adherence to any ethical doctrine other than EE.  Smith is

therefore a hypocrite. Given that he’s a hypocrite, he has a choice:



                  (i) he can admit to himself that he’s a hypocrite,



      or:



                  (ii) he can deny that he’s a hypocrite.



      No one wants to believe that he’s a fraud. So Smith will probably

choose (ii). (Speaking empirically, Smith may choose (i)—but it’s unlikely.

[28]
  )



       So, given the reasonable supposition that Smith doesn’t see

himself as a fraud, he’ll take path (ii). This means that he’ll rationalize and

that, to that extent at least, he’ll ipso facto sociopathize. I suspect that, in

advocating EE, Nietzsche was trying steer people away from the path of

sociopathy-conducive rationalizations. Nietzsche was obviously smart

enough to know that EE is not viable as a theory as to how people should

treat one another. But he also said explicitly that ethical theories other than

EE either damage their adherents or turn them into frauds or both.              Nietzsche said many things which, when taken out of context,

suggest that he wanted people to be evil towards others. Presumably, we

should take authors at their word. But supposing, if only for argument’s

sake, that  Nietzsche did want people to be evil towards one another, his

wanting that was subordinate to his wanting people to be authentic.



      “Supposing that you’re right,” I have been asked, “why didn’t

Nietzsche say what you just said? Why did he not duly disclaim his

exhortations that people look out for themselves? Why did not he say ‘I

don’t really want you to be evil towards others; what I really want is for you

not to be hypocrites.’?”



              Nietzsche’s basic message was: “people are weak and cowardly,

but they tell themselves that their weakness and cowardice are virtues; and

as long as they keep believing this, they cannot live authentically.” Obviously

one of Nietzsche’s objectives in making this point was to point out an

interesting fact about the human condition. But that wasn’t his only or,

indeed, his primary objective. His primary objective was to cut through the

rationalizations by which people convinced themselves that their cowardice

and weakness were virtues and by which, consequently, they kept

themselves in a diminished state. Nietzsche was trying to crack the whip.

Had he duly disclaimed his words, he would have failed to do that; his points

would have registered with people as purely theoretical ones. Moreover, his

equivocations and qualifications would have undermined his own message.

For they would (rightly) have been seen as embodying the slimy evasiveness

of the scholar who, not wanting to be pinned down, rationalizes his

pedantry as “rigor”; and he would thus have been seen as exemplifying the

very cowardice and hypocrisy that it was his intention to extirpate.  



           In this connection it is to be noted that Nietzsche invented the

concept of “intellectualization.” To intellectualize is to make a painful truth

seem innocuous by treating it as being purely theoretical. Intellectualization

is a form of repression. But, in intellectualizing, what one represses (orkeeps repressed) is not one’s knowledge of the painful truth per se and

instead one’s knowledge of how that truth bears on one’s life-situation.



      By keeping one’s knowledge of that truth per se unrepressed, one

is at liberty to use it in discursive contexts, and one is also spared having to

rationalize away any evidence for it that one encounters. Intellectualization

is thus a “thinking man’s” form of repression. Like everyone else,

intellectuals engage in repression. Sometimes, what they wish to repress is

knowledge of a truth that, so long as they consciously know it, enhances

their intellectual powers. Not wanting to forfeit the intellectual benefits of

having that knowledge, they compromise: they don’t repress that

knowledge per se but they do repress their knowledge of its bearing on their

lives. So, qua piece of theoretical weaponry, that knowledge remains

conscious. But, qua knowledge that warrants their changing themselves in

fundamental ways, it is repressed. 



          Let us end this section by dealing with a problem that came up

earlier but that we did not then have the chance to address. We saw some

reason  to  believe  that  ethical  theories  are  categorically  incoherent.

Supposing this to be correct, if only for argument’s sake, a question arises: If

we find an ethical theory to be incoherent, should we cease to endorse it?

No. Any viable ethical theory is necessarily incoherent. We have a word for

that incoherence: injustice.



       Unless restrained, people will destroy the institutions that give

our lives much of their meaning and value.  Thus, any viable ethical theory

restrains  people.  At  the  same  time,  any  instance  case  of  restraining

someone is ipso facto unjust, since injustice is the thwarting of aspirations,

even though such an injustice may be necessary to off-set some far greater

injustice.



        When choosing between ethical theories, we are choosingbetween  bad  and  worse,  not  between  good  and  better.  An  extensive

defense of this contention is given in my (2010) book Morality, Politics, and

Law, so. So I will say no more about it here.



      18.6  Ira Einhorn and other famous psychopaths



              I would like to end by revisiting the topic of psychopathy.



              Psychopaths  are  always  charlatans.  For  this  reason,  among

others,  they  tend  to  be  cult  leaders.  Many  an  “enlightened”  sage  is  a

psychopath.  If  someone  is  described  as  having  a  “spacious  consciousness”,

odds are: he’s a psychopath.



       Ira Einhorn, an icon of the 1960’s, was a very pure example of a

psychopath. After being put on trial for murdering his girlfriend, Einhorn fled,

was convicted, and sentenced to death in absentia. During that time, he lived in

France. (At the time, France’s policy was not to extradite fugitives who faced

the death penalty. Hence Ira’s decision to reside there.) Despite being well

known  in  France  as  somebody  who  had  been  convicted  of  murdering  his

girlfriend, he was extraordinarily successful at attracting women. He managed

to  convince  them,  as  he  did  many  males,  that  he  was  the  victim  of  a

government  conspiracy----notwithstanding  that,  by  his  own  admission,  the

mummified corpse of his girlfriend had been in a trunk in his closet for two

years.



              Einhorn’s murder of his girlfriend was a mere by-product of his

psychopathy.  Most  psychopaths  are  not  murderers.  The  essence  of

psychopathy  isn’t  murderousness;  it’s  emptiness.  What  made  Einhorn  a

psychopath was the fact that he was an empty shell who hid his emptiness with

a veneer of learnedness and of compassion for others. Because Einhorn was so

empty, nothing meant anything to him. Therefore, killing his girlfriend meant

nothing to him. In a non-psychopath, a desire to kill a loved one have to powerthrough heavy-duty bulwarks erected by one’s conscience. So there would have

to be intense rage. In a non-psychopath, there is no conscience; so an act that,

if committed by a non-psychopath, would indicate white-hot passion might, if

committed by a psychopath, indicate nothing more than a passing whim.



      While a student at the University of Pennsylvania, Einhorn’s mentor

was a distinguished historian by the name of Morse Peckham. Peckham was

very  much not a  psychopath.  Peckham  was  initially  deeply  impressed  by

Einhorn; he thought he had had found a protégé in Einhorn. After a couple of

years, Peckham realized that Einhorn’s theatrical way of speaking had blinded

him to the fact that Einhorn never said anything that wasn’t simply a repetition

of a point that he (Peckham) had made to him. 



       Famous for his speeches on behalf of both environmentalism and

pacifism,  his  advocacy  of  each  doctrine  was  insincere.  He  used

environmentalism  not  to  enhance  people,  but  to  diminish  them.  In  telling

people that virtually everything they did was bad for the environment, he was,

in effect, telling them that they were bad for the environment and therefore

they  did  not  deserve  to  exist.  His  environmentalism  was  quite  as  pure  an

expression of homicidal rage as his murder of his girlfriend.



        His advocacy of pacifism was similarly underhanded. Like many

psychopaths, he advocated moral relativism (“there is no right or wrong”) as

                [29]
well  as  alethic relativism  (“there  is  no  truth;  it’s  all  subjective”).  His

advocacy of world-peace was based, not on the principle that certain things are

objectively wrong, but on the principle that, since nothing is objectively right or

wrong,  no  culture  has  the  right  to  act  aggressively  towards  another.  What

Einhorn didn’t say is that if nothing is right or wrong there’s no moral reason

not to hurt others. (According to Marxism, the concept of right and wrong are

bourgeois hogwash. This made it possible for Stalin, Mao, and Pol Pot to kill on

an unprecedented scale.) Also, by advocating alethic relativism, Einhorn was

wiping away thousands of years’ worth of hard work, since the message he was

sending was that the accomplishments of thinkers over the ages were worthnothing.  This  message  obviously  appeals  to  people  who  want  to  be  great

thinkers but either lack the requisite talent or aren’t willing to do the requisite

work.



              The themes underlying his speeches, and often explicitly affirmed

in them, were:



                  (i) One’s emotions are as good a guide to truth as a

          scientist’s experiments.



                  (ii)  Astrology  is  no  less  worthy  of  study  than

          physics.



                  (iii) Commerce is inherently evil.



                    (iv) Institutionalized authority is inherently evil.



      These views seem liberal and progressive. They are not. For they are

misleading ways of saying that



                  (a) Hard work, personal integrity, and genuine ability

        mean nothing.



                  (b) One’s emotions, and thus one’s prejudices, are

        the royal road to truth (that being why astrology, which one

        can practice without having ever so much as cracked a book,

        is no less worthy a discipline than physics, which requires

        years of patient study).



                (c) The appropriate attitude for a human being is the        unbridled narcissism of an infant, an expression of which is a

        virulent hatred of anyone who frustrates his desires.



                  (d) There is nothing of value in the institutions that

          prevent us from killing one another and that require us to

        rise above the narcissistic pettiness to which, in the absence

        of external inducements, we default.




             In  urging  acceptance  of  (i)-(iv),  Einhorn  was  really  urging

acceptance of (a)-(d), and he was thus imploring people to understand the

world in the same emotion-driven, projective manner as our cave-dwelling

ancestors. Thus, Einhorn’s supposed progressiveness was the purest form of

regressivism. Because Einhorn was representative in this respect of an entire

generation of so-called liberals, people who don’t want to return to a tribal

mode of existence are given an incentive to not be liberal, even if they haven’t

a conservative bone in their body.



              I feel that a few remarks about my personal experiences may not

be out of order, so long as it’s kept in mind that those remarks may well be

nothing more than prejudice-driven interpretations of facts about my life that,

even  if  interpreted  dispassionately,  would  reveal  little  about  the  world.  I

personally have known many leading members of the 1960’s counterculture; a

very close relative of mine is one of the two or three best known astrologers in

the  nation.  These  particular  individuals  are  among  the  most  ill-willed  and

intellectually rigid people that I know. And, having attended many functions

over which they presided, I have found the same to be true of their followers.

For this reason, I suspect that acceptance of 1960’s-style liberalism often has

roots in one, or both, of the following factors:



                  (1) A wish to disguise, both from oneself and from others, a

        virulent, all-consuming ill-will,        and:



                  (2)  A  combination  of  a  rabid  desire  for  power,

        coupled with a narcissistic unwillingness to put in the work

        required  to  achieve  success  within  institutions  where  they

      don’t  make  the  rules  and  where  they’ll  be  subjected  to

        meaningful scrutiny.



        18.6.1 Wittgenstein  



             Einhorn  was  a  big  Wittgenstein  fan.  This  was  no  accident.

Wittgenstein was a psychopath. A below average student in both high-school

and college, he received a PhD from Cambridge without taking any of the

standard entrance-exams, without taking a single class, and without writing so

much  as  a  single  paper,  apart  from  the  TLP. He  submitted  the  TLP  as  his

dissertation and, on that basis, was “awarded” a doctorate in Philosophy.



                Wittgenstein supposedly labored over the TLP. If this is true, his

efforts were to no avail. The end result was an absolute failure. It’s maximally

obscure, except when what it’s saying isn’t trivial or obviously false. No effort is

made to clarify the obscure statements or to substantiate them. Each sentence

is labored and artificial and fails to flow into the next one.



      Also, Wittgenstein doesn’t say how one sentence, or one section,

relates to the next. Instead, he uses an elaborate numbering system that is

meant  to  identify  the  logical  interrelations  holding  among  the  various

statements composing the TLP. But the numbering system, though giving the

TLP  a  much  needed  appearance  of  rigor  and  coherence,  only  adds  to  the

obscurity. To this day, scholars have failed to produce a single interpretation of

Wittgenstein’s numbering system that doesn’t add more incoherencies to the

TLP than are already known to be there.       But Bertrand Russell, the world’s most distinguished philosopher at

the time, and still considered by many, myself included, to be the greatest

philosopher of the last 150 years or so, gave the TLP his seal of approval. (He

later  deeply  regretted  doing  so.)  And voila! Wittgenstein  had  a  PhD  in

philosophy, despite Wittgenstein’s previously mentioned lack of credentials and

the despite the TLP’s total lack of merit.              



        The Tractatus contains no argumentation. It consists of assertions

that, on the rare occasions when they’re intelligible, are very obviously false.

Consider his thesis that all meaningful statements are verifiable. No sooner did

philosophers read that sentence than they saw it to be subject to obvious

counter-examples  (e.g.  “all  copper  conducts  electricity”).  To  take  another

example:  Consider  this  thesis  that  all  complex  statements  (statements

consisting  of  other  statements)  are truth-functions of  the  component

            [30]
statements.  In other words, given a complex sentence, e.g. “Smith is tall

and Jones is short”, whether that sentence is true is determined by whether its

components (“Smith is tall” and “Jones is tall”) are true.) Again, no sooner does

one  read  this  sentence  than  one  sees  it  to  be  subject  to  obvious

counterexamples. (Consider the sentence: “Jones got fired because he has poor

people  skills.”  Given  only  that  each  of  “Jones  got  fired”  and  “he  has  poor

people-skills” is true, it’s an open question whether Jones’ getting fired had

anything  to  do  with  his  having  poor  people-skills.)  Given  the  profound

differences  between  iconic  and  non-iconic  forms  of  representation,

Wittgenstein’s “picture-theory of meaning” can only be seen as making the

empty  point  that  sentences  are  picture-like in  that,  like  pictures,  they  are

(sometimes) representational.  With a few trivial exceptions, none of the other

intelligible sentences in the Tractatus fares any better.



        The Tractatus is a tiny work. If printed in the same font as the

sentence you are reading, and on pages the size of the one before you, it would

be around 10 pages long. But it appears much longer than it is. The reason for

this  is  that  it  isn’t  written  in  paragraphs,  like  other  books.  It  consists  of

numbered remarks, each of which is separated from its neighbors by large

spaces, as if to emphasize its importance.            The remarks are numbered by decimals, not whole numbers. The

decimals  are  supposed  to  indicate  relations  of  subordination.  (So,  remark

#5.211 is subordinate to remark #5.21, as is remark # 5.212. I use a similar

system in this book.) Thus, the numbers are supposed to indicate the logical

relations holding among the corresponding statements.



         But in the Tractatus, there is no discernible relationship between a

given statement’s number and its relation to the statement, or statements, to

which it is supposedly subordinate. A philosopher named Kevin Gibson wrote a

                                                                                      [31]
paper with the title “Is the numbering system in the Tractatus a joke?”

Presumably the author thought so. I agree with him.) The numbers give the

Tractatus an appearance of hard-hitting rigor  that a reading of it fails to bear

out.



      At the time, Russell was the most influential and respected figure in

the  philosophical  world.  Having  convinced  Russell  of  his  philosophical

greatness, Wittgenstein enlisted Russell’s help in finding a publisher for the

Tractatus.  Russell  was  obviously  as  capable  as  anyone  in  the  philosophical

community of convincing publishers to accept a work they would otherwise

reject.  Nonetheless,  the  first  20  publishers  whom  Russell  urged  to  publish

Wittgenstein’s credibility by publishing Wittgenstein’s work than by being black-

listed by Russell. In any case, the 21st publishing house agreed to publish it, but

only on the condition that Russell write a substantial preface to it, so that the

book would basically be a paper by Russell, which would inevitably be good,

followed  by  Wittgenstein’s  curious  little  effort,  which,  it  was  presumably

hoped, it would overshadow.



      Russell’s preface is illuminating and enjoyable to read. Wittgenstein

rewarded  Russell  for  his  efforts  by  saying  that  his  preface  thoroughly

misrepresented  the Tractatus, but without saying how it did so and without

entertaining  the  possibility  that  it  might  be his fault that nobody, including

Russell, could understand what he was saying. (Russell did in fact misrepresent

some of  Wittgenstein’s  claims.  But  in  so  doing,  he  attributed  views  toWittgenstein that were more cogent than those advocated by Wittgenstein

himself.) Wittgenstein fumed for the entirety of his career about how nobody

understood what he wrote. He never blamed himself for this. It was always the

reader’s fault.



      Soon after the Tractatus was published, every clear statement in it,

with  a  few  unimportant  exceptions,  was  shown  to  be  false,  thoroughly

confused  and,  unlike  other  false,  confused  statements,  not  even  obliquely

suggestive  of  anything  that  was  true  or  fruitful.  Since  it  was  written  by

Wittgenstein,  who  everybody  knew  to  have  been  given  Russell’s  seal  of

approval, the Tractatus was treated with reverence (and still is). But not a single

philosopher could find anything in the Tractatus that, no matter how liberally

interpreted,  was  even  remotely  close  to  the  truth  or  that  provided  clear

evidence that its author had any philosophical ability.



      In the immediate aftermath of its publication, when the grievous

problems with the Tractatus became public knowledge, Wittgenstein vanished

for ten years, resigning his professorship and severing all contact with anyone

in the philosophical community. During that time, he had no jobs of substance.

He was a middle school teacher for a while, but was fired for physically abusing

his students.



            When he returned to Cambridge, he argued that there is no truth

(or, what is the same, that truth is culture-dependent, being nothing more than

a myth we create to validate our linguistic practices); that, so far as they don’t

consist of sensations, minds are identical with overt bodily movements; that all

philosophical  puzzles  are  immediately  solved  by  looking  at  how  words  are

ordinarily  used;  and  that  mathematical  statements  never  represented

discoveries and were in all cases conventions or stipulations.



      After returning to philosophy, Wittgenstein published nothing. He

disseminated his thought through lectures. He did not permit people to attend

his lectures unless he had a personal relationship with them. Distinguishedphilosophers from other universities were not allowed to attend his lectures.

He thus ensured that the Tractatus would be the last work of his that, during

his lifetime, was made available to anyone over whom he didn’t have personal

power.  



              Most of his lectures were transcribed. The ones that his followers

judged to be the more presentable ones have been published. Once somebody

who desperately wanted to see merit in Wittgenstein’s work, I have read them

carefully. They consist of scattered remarks. The remarks are in most cases

devoid of any discernible meaning. They are seldom clarified or substantiated. 



       That said, certain themes clearly run through them. There is no

truth;  what  scientists  refer  to  as  “discoveries”  are  just  changes  in  the

conventions governing certain terms; if one knows how a word is used, one

knows everything there is no know about its meaning. Psychopaths don’t really

understand terms like “right” and “wrong,” “good” and “bad.” But they know

how to use such terms. In saying that, once one knows how a word is used, one

ipso facto knows everything there is to know about its meaning, Wittgenstein

was, I suspect, trying to convince himself that, falsely, that he did grasp the

meanings of moral terms, given that he knew how they were used (at least

relative  to  a  conception  of  word-usage,  such  as  the  one  that  Wittgenstein

advocated, that takes into account public behaviors, but not their psychological

underpinnings).



            What all of these themes have in common is that, if they’re right,

everybody who has ever sought truth was on a fool’s errand. The nihilistic

currents  that  run  through  the  various  remarks  composing  his  lectures  give

them a superficial unity. But ultimately those lectures are heaps of disjoint

comments,  which,  unlike  the  two-liners  produced  by  other  thinkers,  are

uninformative and painful to read.



              But those who listened to those very lectures were mesmerized

by  Wittgenstein’s  charisma.  (Among  those  was  Norman  Malcolm,  who,following Wittgenstein, claimed that people don’t actually have dreams, our

misguided belief to the contrary being a product of our mistakenly thinking that

the words that people utter when discussing their (non-existent) dreams are

anything  more  than  empty  noises.)  It  is  suggestive  that,  setting  aside  self-

described  Wittgensteinians,  those  who  read  his  lectures  have  a  negative

reaction to them, if they have any reaction at all, whereas those who saw him

talk  reacted  very  favorably.  It’s  also  suggestive  how  carefully  Wittgenstein

vetted those who wished to attend his talks.



        One point that Wittgenstein did make clearly is that there is no

psychological component to linguistic behavior. He said that thought “consists

in manipulations of symbols.” He also said that linguistic symbols are inherently

public. In his view, it isn’t by virtue of any mental state of yours that, when you

say “snow is white," you mean what you are saying, whereas, when a parrot

says it, it doesn’t mean anything. Although he wrote in a sufficiently loose and

obscure manner that always allowed him the option to back away from what

he seemed to have said, he made remarks that either mean nothing or mean

that beliefs, values, and other enduring psychological structures, are identical

with the overt behaviors of which, so it is generally presumed, they are but the

effects; and he made remarks that strongly suggest that he didn’t believe there

to be such a thing as consciousness. His ridiculous view that thought is an

inherently social, as opposed to individual, phenomenon is an artifact of these

clearly erroneous assumptions.



      Wittgenstein’s false identification of the mind with bodily behavior

(plus  consciousness)  makes  it  pointless  to  examine  oneself.  It  is  thus  an

attractive  view  for  somebody  who  doesn’t want to  examine  himself.

Wittgenstein said that “there are no mysteries.” It was unclear whether he was

referring to the mind or to philosophy. He seems to have been referring to

both. If he were right about this, then one would have carte blanche to believe

one’s own rationalizations.



      When he first met him, Russell described Wittgenstein as “thepurest example of genius that I know.” In so describing Wittgenstein, Russell

was describing the latter’s mannerisms, not his thought. When substantiating

this characterization of Wittgenstein, he cites the fact that Wittgenstein would

alternate  between  long  silences,  during  which  he  appeared  engrossed  in

thought,  and  sudden  bursts  of  speech,  which,  though  obscure,  were

accompanied by energetic, almost aggressive, gestures that made it clear that,

think what one may of them, those outbursts contained true insights. Russell

mentions only one comment that Wittgenstein made during his conversations

with him. Russell had put forth an argument, in which it was assumed for

argument’s  sake  there  wasn’t  a  rhinoceros  in  the  room  they  were  in.

Wittgenstein’s only response to this arguments: “how do you know that there

isn’t a rhinoceros in the room?” As any philosophy professor knows, this is a

perfect instance of the knee-jerk skepticism on which people with no talent for

this discipline fall back when they don’t know how else to engage what they’re

            [32]
being told.  After knowing Wittgenstein for a month or so, Russell wrote

that Wittgenstein had nothing of substance to say and that conversations with

him were a "waste of time."



                When Wittgenstein met Russell, Wittgenstein’s father was the

wealthiest  man  in  Europe.  After  inheriting  much  of  his  father’s  wealth,

Wittgenstein himself was the wealthiest man in Europe. Why mention this?

Because if a billionaire shows up and asks you for a professorship, you’ll have a

strong incentive to give it to him (if, like Russell, you have the power to do so);

and you’ll look very hard for legitimate reasons to do so. And if you can find

anything resembling such a reason---anything that, by any stretch, could pass

for such a reason----you’ll pounce on it.  In any case, it seems unlikely that, if

Wittgenstein had been a coal miner’s son, his sudden appearance at Russell’s

door would have elicited such hospitality.



           In  his  later  years,  Russell  (1958)  withdrew  his  support  for

Wittgenstein’s work. Though Russell doesn’t say so explicitly, he seems to have

thought that Wittgenstein had played for him for a fool and that his support of

him was misguided. What Russell does say explicitly is that Wittgenstein’s post-

Tractarian work “did not influence me at all.” And what he says he says aboutthe Tractatus consists mostly of arguments, all of them cogent, to the effect

that specific points made in it the Tractatus are false. His remaining comments

about the Tractatus express irritation (and, I suspect, A certain moral outrage)

at the fact that his points are delivered without any justification, “like a Czar’s

ukase”, and at the related fact that, because he felt his statement not to require

substantiation, he didn’t clarify them.



      Wittgenstein’s writing is obscure in the extreme. When people put

forth  interpretations  of  his  work,  Wittgenstein always said  that  they  were

wrong, but never said exactly how they were wrong. There was one exception

to this. Wittgenstein claimed that Frank Ramsey, a distinguished philosopher

and  logician  who  died  at  age  26,  had  correctly  interpreted  the Tractatus. I

strongly believe that Wittgenstein’s saying this was a strategic move:. At the

time,  Ramsey  was  regarded  as  a  luminary  by  both  philosophers  and

economists. (He is still so regarded.)  B by saying that Frank Ramsey understood

the TLP, he was saying that his work wasn’t meaningless: it only appeared that

way to people who, unlike Ramsey and himself, were too stupid to understand

it.  Also,  given  how  respected  Ramsey  was,  had  Wittgenstein  claimed  that

Ramsey  didn’t  understand  what  he  was  saying,  he  would  have  aroused

immediate suspicion, and the ensuing reappraisal of his work would have put a

swift end to his career.



                People in Wittgenstein’s inner circle didn’t question the Master

or  ask  him  to  clarify  what  he  was  saying.  Contemporary  Wittgensteinians

become very uneasy around people who ask for clarification. I’ve noticed that

every competent student that I’ve had was left cold by Wittgenstein’s work. I've

also noticed that when asked to discuss anything that was written clearly, these

students  of  mine  reacted  with  blank  incomprehension,  followed  by  acute

embarrassment. 



         Wittgenstein never completed anything. The Tractatus is not in

any significant sense a complete work. It’s not really a work at all. It consists of

loosely  connected  remarks, that on which Wittgenstein’s bogus numbering-system imposes an appearance of unity. Taken individual, those remarks, when

intelligible, are false or trite. The only authors whose work he engages are

those whom he personally knew; and he engages their work only in a cursory

fashion. In his writings, Wittgenstein repeatedly exhorts his readers not to do

philosophy. He explicitly says that his works should be the last philosophical

works ever written. He discouraged would-be philosophers from going into

philosophy. 



                Wittgenstein admitted that he rarely read the work of other

philosophers. In his own writing, he never develops ideas, at least not in a clear

or systematic fashion. It is left to the reader to do Wittgenstein’s work for him--

-to  interpret    Wittgenstein’s  unintelligible  remarks  in  such  a  way  that  they

express defensible contentions and, at that point, to provide arguments for

those contentions.



            Wittgenstein projected an air of “unremitting integrity”,,” as one

author (not a personal acquaintance of his) put it. But it isn’t clear wherein his

integrity lay. His work consists of unsubstantiated statements to the effect that

nothing means anything; he was physically abusive to his students and, on one

occasion, to Karl Popper, a very capable contemporary philosopher with whom

he  was  having  a  conversation  in  which  Popper  identified  fallacies  in  what

Wittgenstein was saying; although he technically did hold a professorship at

Cambridge, he had no clearly defined responsibilities. The philosophers who

matriculated under him continued to toe his line after his death, leading in

some  cases  to  positively  ludicrous  assertions  becoming  orthodoxies  (e.g.,

Gilbert Ryle’s insistence that other people are better than oneself at knowing

what one is consciously thinking).



         It is often said that Wittgenstein was a “genius," but those who say

this never cite any actual instances of his genius; and, although some people of

great intelligence (e.g., Michael Dummett) have said it, their saying it is almost

always followed by an argument, usually a cogent one, as to why Wittgenstein’s

                [33]
views are false.      Wittgenstein’s professional success was based entirely on the air of

mystique that he cultivated. His post-Tractarian work consisted entirely in his

blocking off fruitful avenues of inquiry. He insisted, in fact, that any attempt to

solve any philosophical problem was ipso facto misguided. In the work in which

he  made  that  claim,  he  said,  without  ever  saying  what  he  meant,  that

“everything is as it appears” and “there are no mysteries.” He also says, without

clarifying what he means, that “the purpose of philosophy is to show the fly the

way out of the bottle.”



              One can see how one could see great depth in such statements.

But one could also see how one could project depths into those statements

that they don’t have. In fact, there is little, if anything, in Wittgenstein’s work

that, when interpreted literally as opposed to projectively, has any meaning at

all.



      Wittgenstein’s native language was German, not English. He never

became fluent and always spoke with a heavy accent. This, I suspect, was much

of the reason he wasn’t seen for what he was. It immediately disposed people

not to  take  what  he  was  saying  at  face  value,  to  assume  that  his  obscure

utterances bore hidden meanings, and, consequently, to project meanings into

words that weren’t there. 



        Wittgenstein spoke little English when he first met Russell. But,

even though Russell spoke fluent German, Wittgenstein insisted on speaking

English. This is because Wittgenstein knew that, had he spoken in German,

Russell would have seen that his failure to say anything meaningful was a

result, not of his being unable to articulate his thoughts, but of his not having

any. Also, because at that time Wittgenstein's English was so poor and because,

as a result, he wasn't saying anything meaningful, Wittgenstein's words were, I

more than suspect, like a blank a canvass onto which Russell liberally projected

his own insights, this being why despite initially believing Wittgenstein to be an

imbecile and a phony, he came to see great depths in Wittgenstein's broken

sentences.              During his lectures, Wittgenstein would pause for unusually long

periods of time. During these pauses, his face and bodily movements projected

deep  pensiveness  along  with  an  almost  maniacally  intense  level  of

concentration. To a large extent, I suspect, these silences were Wittgenstein’s

way  of  avoiding  having  to  say  anything  and,  therewith,  of  allowing  his

audience-members to project into his fragmentary speech the very insights

that he was unable to come up with himself. But, so far as they weren’t just

bogus  theatrics,  his  long  pauses  and  looks  of  consternation  were,  I  would

conjecture, expressions of the fact that he had to struggle to put his thoughts

into English.



          Wittgenstein’s work was hollow. He refused to clarify anything

that he said. He refused to concede that anyone understood anything that he

said.  Given  its  thoroughly  nihilistic  character  and  its  curt  dismissal  of  any

attempt to seek philosophical truth, Wittgenstein’s work would have put an

end  to  philosophical  thought,  had  it  not  been  for  the  fact  that  many

philosophers didn’t give any credence to what he said. He failed to complete

anything of substance. He earned degrees and titles without going through

anything resembling the process that others had to go through to earn similar

accolades.  His  speedy  journey  from  below-average  high-school  student  to

holder  of  a  Chair  in  Philosophy  at  Cambridge  was  based  entirely  on  the

impressions that people had of his character. (More likely, it was based on one

person’s impressions of his character. The academic world being what it is, once

Bertrand Russell threw his weight behind Wittgenstein, everyone fell in line.)

These are all textbook signs of psychopathy.



         Wittgenstein unremittingly attempted to discourage anyone, apart

from a select few, from entering into the discipline of philosophy. The few

intelligible remarks that he made were glib and platitudinous. When criticisms

of the Tractatus began to roll in, he petulantly quit his job and ceased to have

any communication with anyone in the discipline of philosophy. (It is worth

noting that, before publishing the Tractatus, he described it as being the last

philosophical work that need ever written. His reasons: first, there was no

legitimate philosophical question to which it didn’t provide a definitive answer;second,  it  exposed  defects  in  the  discipline  of  philosophy  that,  once  seen,

would warrant a universal abandonment of it.) In his post-Tractarian work, he

repeatedly said that no work in philosophy should be done after his death. He

used personal relationships as a surrogate for work. Given all of this, I conclude

that Wittgenstein was a psychopath.



              Wittgenstein  gave  away  his  large  fortune.  This  may  seem

inconsistent with the contention that Wittgenstein was a psychopath. It is not.

He did this to consolidate his false veneer of legitimacy. “How could a bad

person do such a good thing?” Answer: To give credibility to his false veneer of

legitimacy. What drives the psychopath isn’t a desire for money. It’s a desire to

construct an identity to take the place of the one he doesn’t have. 



              Wittgenstein’s famous final words were: “Tell them I had a good

life.” He did not have a good life. His life was a lie. Like his acts of charity, those

words were meant to make a corrupt and bogus life seem real and, thus,

worthy of emulation. (Why would somebody who had actually had a good life

say that on his death bed?)



            What I personally find striking about Wittgenstein is that, although

he wrote in what were clearly meant to be punchy two liners, nothing he wrote

goes over well if quoted. Abraham Lincoln had several brilliant two-lines; so did

Yogi Berra. La Rouchefoucauld had dozens. Wittgenstein had not a single one.

And not for lack of trying.



        18.6.2 Foucault  



             Michel Foucault is philosopher who was an even more pure

example of psychopathy than Wittgenstein.  Wittgenstein, I believe, wasn’t

always  a  psychopath.  Wittgenstein’s  early  days,  he  tried  to  do  good  work.

When he failed, rather than admit defeat and rather than deal with the shame

he must have felt, he psychopathized. He needed time to construct a new,bogus  narrative  relative  to  which  his  painful Tractatus-related  realizations

about himself meant nothing---he needed time to psychopathize---this being

why he retreated into virtual solitude for ten years. 



              But Foucault was a psychopath from day one. At no point in his

career did he show the slightest interest in the truth.  His writing is even more

obscure  than  Wittgenstein’s.  And  when  he  contracted  H.I.V.,  he  had

unprotected sexual intercourse with hundreds of women, without telling them

about his condition. Despite this well known fact, he is revered by professors of

women’s  studies    and  other  disciplines  (e.g.  anthropology)  that  are  staffed

primarily by women and one of whose  objectives is to identify the forces

responsible for the oppression of women.



            How can this be? Even though Foucault’s work, like Wittgenstein’s,

makes little or no sense, certain themes clearly run through it:



            Truth  is  a  lie  told  by  the  patriarchy  (and  therefore  doesn’t

    exist).  So-called  “principles  of  reasoning”  and  “rules  of  logic”  are

    machinations, devised by the running dogs of capitalism, to ensure

    that women and other traditionally disempowered groups continue to

    be dominated by moneyed Westerners.



            This is a Marxist-feminist version of what Wittgenstein said.



            Another important similarity between Foucault and Wittgenstein

was that each cultivated an enormous cult of personality. Had they written

clearly, like Carl Hempel or Arthur Pap, they wouldn’t have been seen as gurus

and their work would have been evaluated in the same dispassionate way in

which people evaluate the work of Hempel and Pap.



           Even  Russell,  who  to  this  day  is  still  considered  the  greatestphilosopher of the last 100 years, isn’t seen as a guru; there is no cult of

personality surrounding him; and those who find fault with his work never try

to save it by ascribing hidden meanings to it. The reason is that respect for

Russell’s person is contingent on respect for his work. But with Wittgenstein

and  Foucault  it  is  the  opposite.  It  is  only  as  far  as  one  has  respect  for

Wittgenstein and Foucault that one has respect for their work. Their work,

taken on its own, is meaningless. After reading one page of either author,

practically  anyone  would  stop  reading unless he  were  given  some ex parte

assurance that, if only he’d press on, he’d discover treasure-troves of genius.

Having read most of what Wittgenstein wrote (that was published), along with

the leading explanations of it, and having read a fair amount of Foucault, I can

only say: There’s nothing there; those epiphanous discoveries never happen.

What does sometimes happen is that one invests so much time and energy in

these authors that, rather than admit that one has been on a fool’s errand for

however many years and rather than admit that one’s dissertation was a farce,

one becomes part of the lie that perpetuates the thought-crippling myth that

it’s worth one’s time to study what these two wrote.



             Willful obscurity is not merely evidence of psychopathy; it is

psychopathy. There are great thinkers (e.g. Kant) who write obscurely. But the

obscurity is not deliberate; and, ultimately, much of what they’re saying is clear,

even though it has to be read a few times for its meaning to emerge. Had Kant

written more clearly, it would be more enjoyable to read his prose, and one

wouldn’t have to work so hard to figure out what he was saying. But if one is

willing to trudge through Kant’s prose, one usually finds that it’s unambiguously

making a point; and that point is very often an illuminating one.



       I cannot understand most of Spinoza’s Ethics. Spinoza tried to

model that work of his on Euclid’s Elements. The result, for some reason, was a

text that few people understand. But there are long passages in the Ethics that

are as clear as a bell and that contain sparkling insights. And Spinoza’s other

works are clear and good.             Kant  and  Spinoza  were  not  psychopaths.  So  obscurity  isn’t

necessarily a sign of psychopathy. But willful obscurity is a sign of psychopathy,

especially  when  it’s  accompanied,  as  it  was  in  Wittgenstein’s  case  and  in

Foucault’s, by a refusal to provide clarification.                   



       I will end this book right here. There will be no concluding

remarks. Any attempt to distill the material put forth in the preceding pages

into a single, tidy conclusion would involve my imposing a false veneer of

unity on that material. Which, in its turn, would involve either my lying to

myself, and thus sociopathizing, or lying to you, and thus criminalizing.




    [1]
 Jean Paul Sartre (1905–1980) and Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–

1961) are dualists who believe in free will and hold that the physical world is

deterministic, and Peter van Inwagen (1942–) is Peter van Inwagen (1942–)

materialist who believes in free will and hold that the physical world is

indeterministic.


      [2]
 See Freud (1949).


      [3]
   The straightforward version (“you are free if you can do what

you want to do, and unfree so far as you cannot”) was advocated by John

Locke (1632–1704) and G.E. Moore (1873–1958). The more sophisticated

version  is  advocated  by  Immanuel  Kant  (1724–1804)  (in  the Critique  of

Practical  Reason),  Sigmund  Freud  (1856–1941)  (in An  Outline  of

Psychoanalysis and the  Question  of  Lay  Analysis)  and  Harry  Frankfurt

(1929–) (in The Importance of What We Care About).


      [4]
   Moore (1911).


      [5]
      In  philosophy,  split  infinitives  are  hard  to  avoid,  since  the

consequences  of  avoiding  splitting  them  are  often  sentences  that  don’t

mean what one wants to say. There’s a difference between saying “Smith

chose to not strike Harry” and “Smith did not choose to strike Harry.” Thelatter says that Smith failed to make a choice; the former says that he did

make a choice. Of course, “Smith chose not to strike Harry” does avoid the

split infinitive. But having the “to” adds oft-needed emphasis.


      [6]
   See his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Chapter XXI.


      [7]
    See Frankfurt (1988).


      [8]
   More precisely: if JFK hadn’t been assassinated, but otherwise

things were the same to the extent that, given that JFK wasn’t assassinated,

they  could  be  the  same, a  consequence  being  that  JFK  was  healthy  and

popular, etc., then he would have been re-elected.


      [9]
   There are exceptions to this. For example, counterlogicals aren’t

causal claims. An example of a counterlogical would be:


                  (*) If triangles had four sides, they'd have an even

        number of sides.


      (*)  obviously  isn’t  a  causal  claim.  (*)’s  meaning  parallels  (JFK)’s.

Neither  says  anything  about  other  worlds.  Each  merely  registers  some

dependency that holds in this world.


      [10]
    “FA” is short for “free act.”


      [11]
    See Frankfurt (1988, Chapter 2).


      [12]
    Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom corresponds very closely to the

conception of freedom underlying the work of Freud and other thinkers in

the psychoanalytic tradition. But Frankfurt was, to my knowledge, the first

person to articulate this conception of freedom, and he was the first to

defend it in a systematic and rigorous manner.


      [13]
  For an act to be rational, it is to satisfy two conditions:                  (i) The agent must have good reason to believe the

          immediate objective of that act to be one that serves his

          interests


      and


                  (ii) The agent must have good reasons to believe

        that, given the way in which he is attempting to attain his

          immediate  objective,  he  is  indeed  likely  to  attain  it;  he

        must believe his methods to be efficacious. 


      An intelligent act---or, to put it in a way that will probably lead to less

confusion,  an  act  that shows intelligence---need  not  satisfy  the  first

condition. An intelligent act does have to satisfy the second condition. But

must also satisfy another condition, namely: (iii) An unusually high degree of

acumen on the agent’s part was involved in his being justified in believing

that this methods are likely be efficacious.


      [14]
    “FD” can be thought of as short for “freedom to do what one

wants.”


      [15]
      Addiction  doesn’t  obliterate  a  person’s  personality;  it  only

temporarily obscures some of the outlines of the psychological architecture

of  a  person’s  identity.  The  addiction  may  lead  to  some  character

remodeling. But, in most cases, the person is still there, even at the height of

the addiction.


      [16]
   Freud, Stekel, and other early psychoanalysts referred to OCD

as “obsessional neurosis.”


      [17]
   A colleague of mine (who wishes to remain anonymous) told

me  that  sickle  cell  anemia  is  adaptive  in  some  respects.  My  claim  that

physical  ailments  aren’t  adaptive  must  obviously  be  qualified.  Many

ailments  involve  over-active  immune  systems  and  can  be  beneficial  (in

certain respects, at certain junctures).      [18]
  See The Ego and the Id (1923) and Inhibitions, Symptoms, and

Anxiety (1926).


      [19]
       He’s  right  about  this,  in  my  judgment;  but  my  reasons  for

agreeing with Mill on this are not---at least not according to the traditional

interpretation of the relevant works of Mill’s---in agreement with Mill’s own

reasons. 


      [20]
    Many people who focus on martial arts (as I used to do) are, I

suspect, in this category. They're substituting the development of hand-to-hand

combat-skills—which, since pre-historic times, have had only symbolic value,

being of no use in increasing one's actual standing in the world, except in the

rare case where one becomes a professional martial artist.


      [21]
    The only exception to this is ethical egoism, which we’ll discuss in

Sections 6.0-11.0.


      [22]
    In any case, there is nothing under whose jurisdiction they fall

by virtue of their being occupants of LM.


      [23]
    Actually, even this way of putting it suggests that Davidson’s

analysis is less defective than it really is. Davidson’s analysis doesn’t embody

any awareness of the distinction between minds and selves. So, since the

word “us” is a near-synonym of “our selves," it’s misleading to say that,

according to Davidson’s analysis, our desires use us to express themselves, it

being preferable to say that, in order to express themselves, desires use the

information contained in the minds that, when they become selves, become

us.


      [24]
    It isn’t necessarily done shoddily. One damages oneself if one

doesn’t gratify intense instinctual urges. (What follows is similar to, if not

identical  with,  a  point  made  by  Freud  (1923)  and  Freud  (1926.)  And---

speaking  from  a  medical,  as  opposed  to  an  ethical,  point  of  view---if  an

opportunity  arises  in  which  one  can  gratify  them  without  risking

incarceration or other forms of damage to oneself, then one should gratifythem. Those impulses will find a way to discharge themselves. If you thwart

them,  the  pressure  that  they  continue  to  exert  will  warp  your  decision-

making process; they will do so by influencing the decisions that you make in

such  a  way  that,  through  the  ensuing  actions,  they  be  expressed.  But,

oftentimes,  those  decisions  should not be  vehicles  for  impulses:  those

decisions may concern professional matters to which those undischarged

impulses are irrelevant. And, should those decisions come to be vehicles for

one’s aggressive or sexual or otherwise primal urges, they will not be good

ones.


      [25]
   See Bratman’s brilliant discussion of “bootstrapping” in Chapter

2 of The Face of Intention.


      [26]
    In any case, it is the problem that, if I’ve interpreted Bratman

correctly, he believes to be the problem with Davidson’s analysis. I cannot

be confident that I’ve interpreted Bratman correctly, since his discussion of

key points tends to be cautious and highly qualified and therefore obscure. I

can say with certainty, first, that, were it not for my having read Bratman’s

book, my eyes wouldn’t have been opened to the problems with Davidson’s

analysis, which, as I said earlier, I used to find plausible. And I can also say

with certainty that much of what I’m saying, much though it owes to

Bratman, is not to be found in his work.

      [27]
   For a discussion of ethical egoism, see my (2010) book

Morality, Politics, and Law.


      [28]
   People sometimes believe that they’re frauds. But, in the rare

cases when they come to that conclusion, they’re slow to do so, and the

conclusion reached is not as black as it ought to be. For everyone, including

self-admitted frauds, always underestimate the degree to which they are

frauds. (To quote La Rouchefoucauld: “People are never aware of the scope

of their self-deceptions.”) But their confessions to themselves not only

underrepresent, but also misrepresent, what they’re admitting about

themselves. For, when a person admits to being a fraud in one respect, it is

to conceal from himself the fact that he’s a fraud in some other, more

malignant respect. Most admissions of failure and fraudulence are token.      [29]
   “Alethic” means “relating to truth.”


      [30]
   A  complex  statement  is  a  truth-function  of  the  statements

composing it if its truth-value is a function of their truth-values. The sentence

"snow  is  white  and  grass  is  green"  is  a  truth  function  of  the  sentences

composing it, since it is true if they. "It is not the case that snow is white" is a

truth-function of "snow is white," since the former is true if the latter is false.

But  "snow  is  white  because  grass  is  green"  is  not  a  truth-function  of  its

constituent sentences: given only that each of "snow is white" and "grass is

green" is true, it's indeterminate whether it is because grass is green that snow

is white. Thus, whereas "and" and "not" (or "it is not the case that") are "truth-

functional operators," "because" is a non-truth-functional operator.


      [31]
  I have known for a while that somebody or other wrote an

article with this title; but I didn’t know who wrote it, or where or when it

was published. I am indebted to my copy-editor for supplying me with this

information.


      [32]
  See Ray Monk’s (1990) biography of Wittgenstein, The Duty of

Genius. Monk idolizes Wittgenstein. But, as far as I can tell, he does not 

white-wash the facts in Wittgenstein’s favor. He quotes Russell as saying,

during the first few months of his relationship with Wittgenstein, that the

latter was a “fool”, with whom it was a “waste of time” to converse. He also

then points out that, for some reason that Monk does not identify, Russell

underwent a complete change of heart. 


      [33]
   See Dummett’s paper “Can analytic philosophy be systematic,

and ought it to be?”, published in his (1978) collection of essays Truth and

Other Enigmas.