Functional
vs. Structural
Delusiveness

 

J.-M. Kuczynski
                      Functional vs. Structural Delusiveness

                                  J.-M. Kuczynski


There are two kinds of mental illness: those are that are ego-syntonic,

meaning that the subject’s ego is in alignment with his own symptoms and

delusions, so that he does not see his symptoms and delusions as symptoms

and delusions; and those that are ego-dystonic, meaning that the subject’s ego

is not in alignment with his symptoms and delusions, so that he does see his

symptoms and delusions as symptoms and delusions. Of course, the question

will be asked: ‘If someone sees a given one of his delusions as a delusion,

then it is no longer a delusion.’ That is not quite true; a part of him sees it for

what it is; but a part of him doesn’t. More precisely, his intellect can make

the right judgments; but his emotions are not in alignment with his intellect;

rather they are in alignment with his delusions, so that his intellect, though

unimpaired in respect of clarity, lacks the executive power that it would

otherwise have.

An example of an ego-dystonic ailment is OCD; the obsessive-compulsive

sees his symptoms and obsessions and compulsions for what they are; but he

is nonetheless afflicted by them, as his intellect, though unimpaired in respect

of clarity, has no executive or emotive force behind it. An example of an ego-

syntonic ailment is schizophrenia: the schizophrenic is genuinely taken in his

by delusions; there is not, as there is with the obsessive-compulsive, an inner

flame of sanity that stands apart from, and looks down on, the various

delusions in questions; the delusions are, as it were, internal to, and definitive

of, the outlook of the ego in question.

The term ‘ego-dystonic ailment’ has roughly the same extension as the term

‘neurosis’, and the term ‘ego-syntonic ailment’ has roughly the same

extension as the term ‘psychosis.’ 

It has been pointed by clinicians that, although obsessive-compulsives are

relatively clear-sighted---that, relative to those afflicted by psychopathology,

they see things as they are---nonetheless, they are often very much in the

grips of their own delusions; that, in some cases, there is not an intellect that

sees through the delusions. For this reason, some clinicians have gone so far

as to say that OCD is actually a psychosis, as opposed to a neurosis.

It is true that the obsessive-compulsive can sometimes be thoroughly taken inby his delusions; and it is true that the obsessive-compulsive’s intellect has

clarity.

But OCD is nonetheless not a psychosis. And the reason is that, although the

obsessive-compulsive can be taken in his own delusions, those delusions are

always superimposed on a delusive understanding of reality, whereas, in the

case of schizophrenia or any other psychosis, the delusion is primary.

In the case of psychosis, delusions are the consequence of a failure to form

correct conceptions in the first place. In the case of neurosis, they are the

consequence of internal conflict decommissioning or otherwise skewing

existing correct conceptions. In the case of the psychotic, therefore, those

conceptions are not there; which is why the psychotic doesn’t have vicious

resistance-reactions to correct statements concerning his circumstances---

such statements just seem to ‘wash over him. He simply carries on, unphased,

with his story about the workmen living underneath his bed or the dragon

living in his closet or whatnot.

In the case of the obsessive-compulsive, those conceptions are there, though

they have been divested of their usual executive powers; which is why, when

the obsessive-compulsive is initially apprised of the facts relating to his

situation, he reacts with intense resistance, literally hissing and seething with

resentment. He does not simply carry on: he acknowledges what he has been

told; he is troubled by it; and he engages it, often going so far as to construct

point-by-point rebuttals to it. What he doesn’t do is simply let the point wash

over him. He doesn’t do this, because that point spoke to him; and it spoke to

him because, underneath the haze of rationalizations, he sees reality as it is

and therefore recoils when it is described to him as it is.

To sum up: The psychotic’s delusions are structural in nature, in the sense

that they constitute the very backbone of his conception of reality; whereas

the neurotic’s delusions are functional in nature, in the sense that they are the

result of a disempowering of an underlying correct conception of reality, not

the absence of, or eradication of, such a conception.