In some cases, we may get lucky: conditions may remain perfectly constant; a series of events occurs each member of which is qualitatively and quantitatively just like each of the others. In that case, the effect of any given one of those events will be the same, qualitatively and quantitatively, as the effect of any other given one of those events. But circumstances don't remain constant, and they don't have to remain constant for us to learn what causes what. Events are changes. The greater the change, the greater then effect. As long as we can correlate input-differences with output-differences, we can establish causality. A corollary is that a singular events are the effects of a singular antecedent, and, when given a singular event, we know its cause as soon as we identify a singularity among its antecedents. Example: You are a square: somebody who follows all the rules. One night, after a lifetime of celibacy, you decide to sleep with a lady of the night. A few days later, you have a venereal disease. Singular event: the malady. Singular antecedent: the dalliance. Effect: disease. Probable cause: The dalliance. Do such dalliances always lead to venereal disease, or even most of the time? No. Does it matter? No. You know of some event predating your malady that is as singular as your malady. Were that event not the cause of your malady, you would have a genuine anomaly on your hands; but since it is, you don't. Of course, if you had dalliances with 35 such women, then of course you would not be able to pinpoint the cause---but only because any given one of those events could be the cause, notwithstanding that not a single one of them was an instance of an event-type whose instances are always, or even usually, followed by the onset of disease. And this proves the point at hand, that, when e is known to be the cause of e*, it isn t because e-e* is an instance of a perfect regularity; it s because, of e* s various antecedents, e is the only one that is proportional to e*. If e* has many antecedents e1 en, each of them proportional to e*, then e* has many possible causes. In that case, the actual cause has to be decided experimentally. For each i (1?i?n), does an ei-similar lead to an e*-similar event, under conditions similar to those under which e brought about e*? Supposing that the answer is in each case no, then, pending further information, e must be presumed to be the cause of e*. Another example: You force yourself to run three miles. You have a heart-attack. Singular event: the heart-attack. Singular antecedent: you run three miles. (You ve never run so much as a 100 yards in your life.) Do all or even most physically unfit people who run three miles have heart-attacks? No. But there needn't be such a regularity for the jog to have brought on the heart-attack, and you don t need to know of such a regularity, to know what brought on your heart-attack. Given that we can know what causes a given event without knowing of any law L that links cause and effect, it follows, given that to explain an event is to identify its cause, that we can sometimes explain events without explaining them in terms of laws. To explain an event in detail is to explain how the specifics of the event depended on the specifics of the cause, and for that we do need laws. We need laws if we are to have scientific explanations, Where SE is a scientific explanation of an event e just in case: (i) SE identifies the event e* that caused e, (ii) SE identifies the law in virtue of which e* caused e*; and, so it follows, (iii) SE identifies just what it was about e* that was responsible for its bringing about e. But scientific explanations presuppose prescientific explanations. We must distinguish between non-explanations and pre-scientific explanations. Non-explanations are not pre- scientific explanations. If my explanation of the fact that I burnt my hand is that I touched a hot surface, my explanation is correct, but not scientific. If my explanation is that my parents weren t home and it wasn t my touching the hot-stove per se but my transgressing their instructions (don t touch the stove) that caused me to feel scorching pain, then my explanation is false. Also, if my parents give me permission to touch the stove (thinking that it s off), and (because it s on) I scorch my hand, I ll know that, indeed, it was, on each occasion, because the stove was hot that I burnt on my hand; and on neither occasion is it necessary that I know of some regularity to the effect that all people who touch hot stoves feel pain.