Most people, including most psychologists, operate on the assumption that group psychology is to be understood in terms of individual psychology; that individuals have various self-directed drives and that, in group-contexts, these drives are somehow diverted away from their normal paths and pressed into aims that, not being self-directed, are alien to their own. This position is understandable, and is at least descriptively correct, where very basic drives are concerned—divines relating to immediate threats to one’s survival and to the prospect of immediate carnal gratification. But this methodological stance cannot be reconciled with the incredibly high degree of conformism exhibited by people, even after intellectual shortcomings on their part are taken into account, to other people’s opinions; nor can it be reconciled, even after people’s fear of others is taken into account, with the deference given by people, at the expense of their own gratification, to convention and to pre-existing custom, as well as fleeting but powerful fads. Also, given how unintelligent, ignorant, and lacking in moral fiber most individuals are, and yet how much intelligence, knowledge, and moral rigor is embodied in the behavior of collectives, such as corporations and academic disciplines, it is hard to believe that such collectives are the result of various bona fide individuals pursuing their respective paths. It seems rather as though the collective is the primary thing, biologically speaking, and there is an illusion of individual choice and, indeed, of individualism per ser. A cell is an individual organism. But how well can you understand a cell if you try to understand on its own terms? Pretty well but not maximally well. If you tried to understand its behavior in terms of a drive on its part to live or flourish or reproduce, you would get far; but there would still be some unanswered, and unanswerable, questions. But suppose you tried to understand individual cells in the following way. They individualy try to survive, flourish and reproduce to the extent---but only to the extent--that their trying to do so is necessary for the collectives formed thereby to survive and flourish and reproduce. In that case, I would suggest, you will get at least as far as you did with your other hypothesis, and probably further. Cell-individualism can be explained in terms of cell collectivism, but not so much vice versa. Similarly, person-individualism can be explained in terms of person-collectivism, but not so much vice versa. Bona fide individuals—people who think for themselves: geniuses, in other words---can be seen as limiting cases of collectives; as collectives of one, perhaps, or as rogue actors; or, most likely, as members of collectives who have an unusual office within that collective and are therefore seen, wrongly, as not being a part of those collectives. And the intense drives that individuals have to survive and experience gratification can be seen as being necessary for the existence for, and therefore explainable in terms of, the collectives to which they belong. Thus, the facts relating to individual psychology can be reconciled with the view that group psychology is primary. But the opposite seems not to be true. It is very hard to explain group behavior—be the group in question a mere mob or an organized anti-mob, such as an advanced culture---on the assumption that these collectives represent averages of the behaviors of so many armies of one—of so many self-contained existentialist autonomous deciders. Outside of contexts where there are well-defined and immediate threats to physical well being or where there equally well defined prospects of crude forms of gratification---outside of such context, people are predisposed to give far too much weight, and in far too well-defined ways, to existing beliefs and mores than can be accounted for in terms of the hypothesis that collectives are indeed collectives of bona fide individuals.