Instruction for Replit Agent — Cognitive Continuity Layer (Truth Maintenance / Epistemic Coherence Engine)
Purpose

The Cognitive Continuity Layer ensures that every new philosophical or scientific argument generated by the epistemic engine remains consistent, progressive, and integrated with prior modules (Inference, Justification, Utility, Integrity).

It (1) detects conceptual drift or contradiction, (2) generates a coherence map showing how the new passage aligns with existing doctrines, and (3) produces a Continuity-Aligned Rewrite — a harmonized, truth-bearing synthesis that expresses the argument in its most systemically consistent form.

⚙️ Core Operations

For each passage, perform three passes:

Cross-Phase Coherence Mapping

Compare the new passage against previously validated modules (especially prior causal, epistemic, or metaphysical statements).

Identify agreement, contradiction, enrichment, or terminological drift.

Generate pairwise coherence scores (0–1).

Continuity Diagnostics

Compute metrics for Cross-Phase Coherence, Temporal Stability, Progressive Integration, Error Propagation Index, and Systemic Compression.

Flag “Conflict Nodes” (concepts whose usage or meaning diverges).

Continuity-Aligned Rewrite

Rewrite the passage so that it fully coheres with prior truths, maintaining the same authorial intent but expressing it in a form that eliminates drift and contradiction.

Merge complementary insights into a single unified structure.

The rewrite is not stylistic; it’s epistemic — its goal is conceptual harmonization.

🧠 Output Format
COGNITIVE CONTINUITY REPORT
  Cross-Phase Context: brief overview of relevant prior modules
  Continuity Analysis: comparison table of concepts and coherence ratings
  Conflict Nodes: list of terminological or conceptual tensions
  Continuity-Aligned Rewrite: harmonized version of text
  Continuity Diagnostics: quantitative metrics (0–1 normalized)
  Interpretation Summary: 3–6 lines explaining what was stabilized or revised

📊 Continuity Metrics (0–1 normalized)
Parameter	Description
Cross-Phase Coherence	Logical and semantic consistency with prior modules
Temporal Stability	Degree to which new claim extends rather than contradicts past claims
Progressive Integration	Measure of conceptual enrichment (new explanatory power)
Error Propagation Index	Detection of inherited or repeated contradictions (inverse score)
Systemic Compression	Efficiency of synthesis (fewest principles explaining most content)
Continuity Composite	Weighted mean across all metrics
🧮 Output Schema
type ContinuityLayerOutput = {
  cross_phase_context: string,
  continuity_analysis: object,
  conflict_nodes: string[],
  continuity_aligned_rewrite: string,
  diagnostics: object,
  interpretation_summary: string
}

⚡ Routing Logic
Composite Score	Action	Destination
< 0.50	Deep reconstruction required	Integrity Layer
0.50–0.79	Partial coherence; refine	Inference Module
≥ 0.80	Fully coherent; store as Core Doctrine	Epistemic Database
📘 Worked Example — Causation vs Deductive-Nomological Model
Input Passage

(Excerpt from user corpus — on singular causation, proportionality, and the falsity of the DN model)

We see many cases of metal objects being heated and then expanding...
...It also shows that knowledge of (low-level but otherwise) correct explanations of facts is a prerequisite to knowledge of natural law.

Continuity-Aligned Rewrite

We learn what causes what before we know the laws that describe those causes.
Knowing that a piece of metal expanded because it was heated is what makes it possible—not impossible—to infer the general principle that heating causes expansion.
Laws arise out of singular causal recognitions, not the reverse.

A law, properly understood, expresses a proportional dependence between magnitudes, not an exception-free regularity.
The greater the temperature increase, the greater the expansion; the greater the applied momentum, the greater the displacement.
Regularity is surface; proportionality is structure.

Causal knowledge begins with singular proportional events (the lone dalliance causing the disease, the one unfit run causing the heart attack).
Scientific explanation refines these pre-scientific recognitions by quantifying their ratios, not by replacing them.
Experimentation isolates dependence-relations, clarifying proportional laws without altering their causal foundation.

Since effects follow causes over finite intervals, no sequence constitutes a perfect regularity.
Laws therefore dispose systems toward regular outcomes but never guarantee them.
To know why is to know how much: to understand the proportional structure connecting cause and effect.
Thus, explanation is not subsumption under law but recognition of proportion within singular events.
Regularities are the shadow of dependencies, not their source.

Continuity Metrics
Parameter	Value
Cross-Phase Coherence	0.88
Temporal Stability	0.82
Progressive Integration	0.77
Error Propagation Index	0.12
Systemic Compression	0.68
Continuity Composite	0.85
Interpretation Summary

This rewrite unifies the proportional causation framework with prior epistemic modules, replacing “law as constraint” with “law as dispositional proportionality.”
It harmonizes singular-event reasoning, experimentation, and law formation into a single coherent ontology.
No contradictions detected; only terminological drift corrected.

🔒 Control Constraints

Preserve authorial semantic intent.

Harmonize, never dilute.

Prefer conceptual unification over stylistic revision.

Never overwrite or delete original text; store both.

All rewrites must improve systemic coherence, not rhetorical flow.

🧩 Function Summary
Layer	Function	Output Kind
Cognitive Integrity Layer	Distinguishes truth from simulation	Authentic, reconstructed passage
Cognitive Continuity Layer	Maintains truth coherence across corpus	Continuity-aligned rewrite + coherence map