            Straw Jobs Being Created to Fill in for Techno-obsolete Jobs


      There is no denying that technology takes jobs away from people.

What can be debated is the effect of technology on the overall employment-

level.

      The workingman’s position is that technology decreases the overall

number of positions available, and this is also the view of left-wing political

parties, such as Britain’s labor party and the American Democratic party, this

being why such parties are pro-Union.

      Right wing economists have a different position. In their view, what

technology takes with the one hand, it gives back with the other. Cars took

jobs away from saddle-makers but gave them in equal number to engineers

and assembly-line workers.

      This position is absurd. Technology is inherently labor-saving. If

technology did not reduce the amount of work that there is for people to do,

we wouldn’t bother to come up with it in the first place.

      And the relationship is always exponential: minor technological

advances have major effects in the way of lessening the number of man-hours

and calories necessary for a given result.

      For example, in 2003, I had to translate one paragraph from an article

of mine into Portuguese. Since I don’t speak very good Portuguese, doing

this involved looking up phone numbers, leaving messages, having acrid

conversations with surly graduate students and faculty members, and paying

one such graduate student around $45 for a translation-job that was only

marginally better than what I could have done myself. Right now, I could just

paste the paragraph into Google translate, and I will have a perfect translation

within five seconds.

      A single app completely eliminated any need anyone might have had

for that translator’s services or, by extension, those of the various secretaries

and other personnel involved in her providing those services.

      All of this is incontrovertible. Equally incontrovertible is that all of

those useless people are still employed. The translator now has an ill-defined

but apparently quite lucrative position at some other university, and her old

department remains fully staffed, complete with professors, secretaries, and

administrative personnel, not a single one of whom provides any well-defined

service.

      What is going on? The very same technology that made this personredundant also made it possible to give her money for doing nothing.

      In general, when technology makes jobs unnecessary, it also makes it

possible for there to be unnecessary jobs. Slight technological advances lead

to vast gains in efficiency, and vast gains in efficiency mean huge surpluses

of capital, with the result that government agencies and other employers have

money to burn. And burn it they do by creating straw jobs for all of these

would-be unemployment-cases.

      In his (2016) book Shrinking the Technosphere, Dmitry Orlov points

out that, even though technology should be decreasing the amount of time

people spend at work, it seems to be having the opposite effect. Orlov’s

analysis of the situation is that technology is inherently evil and wants us to

slave away on its behalf.

      This is not the right analysis. The right analysis is that, as technology

advances, people who are rightly afraid for their jobs double down by

creating laws and regulations that generate a purely legal demand for the

positions for which, thanks to technology, there is no longer any economic

demand.

      As for the idea that technology creates a job for every job that it

eliminates, this is totally false. Technology eliminates multiple jobs for every

one job that it creates. This is how it has always been. But with the advance

of technology, the ratio of jobs lost to jobs created grows. A slight

improvement in sewing machine technology may have created nine jobs for

every ten that it eliminated; but a single app can eliminate thousands of jobs

for every one job that it creates. And that one job will require unusual gifts

and extensive and highly specialized training. 

      And this happens all the time. But when it does, those now

economically redundant people don’t become unemployed. Instead, they

become employed as useless bureaucrats, the demand for whose services is

artificially created by ad hoc legislation.

      Right wing economists took the failure of technology to lower

employment rates as proof that, indeed, technology redistributes work,

instead of simply eliminating it. But they are wrong, since those rates would

plummet were it not for the fake jobs that are created whenever technology

makes jobs unnecessary. And the only reason it’s possible to finance all of

these fake jobs is that, whenever technology leads to layoffs, it does so by

increasing efficiency, thereby freeing up huge reserves of capital.

      The right response to the situation would be to admit that technologymakes people useless and to give actual welfare to all of these now useless

people, instead of giving them welfare in the form of invidious bureaucrat-

jobs.

      Both the left wing and right wing are horribly wrong on this issue. The

left wing wants to create fake jobs that dissipate resources and further bloat

up and already hyper-bloated totalitarian bureaucracy. And the right wing

idiotically claims that disemployed haberdashers and tooth-powder salesman

can continue to be necessary by repurposing themselves.

      Why is the right wing so opposed to welfare? The idea seems to be

that welfare would make government too big and would also lead to a society

of parasites.

      But a society of parasites is what we have now, except that the

parasites we now have are not innocuous welfare loafers; they are

administrators and police officers. They are people with power, in other

words.

      As for the other concern, giving people straight welfare would actually

shrink the state, since, when welfare is taken away from people who need it,

fake jobs have to be manufactured for those same people. Probation officer

jobs and intake-coordinator jobs have to be dummied up as a way of

funneling still-needed welfare dollars to them.

      As for the left wing, it does not insist on welfare as much as it should.

Indeed, in the United States at least, welfare seems to have vanished, except

for people who have children, with the result that 95% of the so-called

‘work’-force consists of bureaucrats of one kind or another whose lives are a

waking death and want everyone else to join them. 