What Is a
formal
language?

Philosophy Shorts
Volume 24

J.-M. Kuczynski

 
                              What is a Formal Language?


                                      J.-M. Kuczynski


  A formal language L may be identified with an ordered triple (E, G, M),

where


  (i) E is a class of primitive expressions;

  (ii) G is L’s grammar or, equivalently, its syntax; and

  (iii) M is a meaning-function for L or, equivalently, L’s semantics


  A primitive expression is one that cannot be decomposed into other

expressions.

  A grammar is a set of rules that strings of primitive expressions must

satisfy if they are to be grammatical. A grammatical string is a complex (non-

primitive) expression. An ungrammatical string is not an expression of any

kind. A grammar for a given language identifies the conditions satisfied by all

of the members of the smallest class containing every complex expression of

that language.

  A meaning-function for a language L is a set of rules that R…R such
                                                                          1n

that, for any sentence S of that language, R…R identify S’s truth-conditions,
                                                  1n

i.e. R…R say, for any sentence S, under what circumstances S is true and
    1n

under what circumstances S is false.

    Given any language L that does not consist solely of primitive

expressions, any given primitive expressions E of L is defined by a rule to the

effect that, in virtue of having the form “…E…”, a sentence S of L is true

exactly if…x…, for some x. If O is identical with Richard Nixon, then the

semantic rule for “Richard Nixon” is: In virtue of having the form “…Richard

Nixon…”, a sentence S is true exactly if…O…Equivalently, a given such

sentence is true just in case O is a thing x such that…x…

  This analysis is no less true of proper names than it is predicates, logical

operators, and grammatical markers. The reasons for this stated in my

treatise Literal Meaning & Cognitive Content.

  Thus, given any language L that does not consist only of primitive

expressions, the corresponding meaning-function M identifies the truth-

conditions of sentences indirectly: given an arbitrary sentence S and anarbitrary primitive expression E in S, M says how, by virtue of having the

form “…E…”, S’s truth-conditions are different from how they would

otherwise be.

    Herein lies the solution to the question: How can a truth-conditional

semantics----a semantics that assigns meanings to sentences by assigning

truth-conditions to them---accommodate the fact that that there are truth-

conditionally identical but meaning-distinct sentences, e.g.


  (a) “There is some n such that n=2 if arithmetic is incomplete and n=3

  otherwise such that Jim has n-many cars”


and


  (b) “Jim has two cars”,


which, despite having the same truth-conditions, obviously differ in

meaning. A sentence’s semantics is known when it is known what truth-

conditions are assigned to it by the relevant semantic rules, and its syntax is

known when it is known how exactly those rules assign those truth-

conditions to that sentence. The expression “meaning” is ambiguous

between meaning-what and meaning-how. “S’s meaning” can refer either to

S’s semantics or to its semantic decomposition. S’s semantics coincide with

its truth-conditions; S’s syntax coincides with its semantic decomposition.

The expression “S’s meaning” refers to the information borne by S in virtue

of its semantics and its semantic-decomposition. Given that (a) and (b) have

different semantic-decompositions, it follows that they have different

meanings, notwithstanding that they have the same truth-conditions and,

therefore, the same semantics.

  All languages are formal languages. A so-called “formal language” is a

language that is formally described. An artificial language, being created, can

be known to us only through an exact, and therefore a formal, descriptions

of its syntax and semantics. A natural language, e.g. English, is not known to

us in that way. But English obviously has a syntax and a semantics. In fact, it

is precisely because English is so rich, syntactically and semantically, that we

can have only an intuitive, and therefore hard to articular, as opposed to a

discursive, and therefore readily articulated, knowledge of its syntax andsemantics.